Well, the same line we were talking about, the hindrances we were speaking about the
other day.
I think belonging to the body was out, I think they cannot arise without the body.
In separable front, and hindrances have been quite what I had to say, we can add eruptions
of mind, weakness of wisdom and it's always at the first you know, if you can abandon
those, I don't know if it means to destroy those.
Well, no, I don't fully go beyond hindrance, whereby any hindrance that arises, it's
not a hindrance for human, because his mind is beyond that, or above them, so they don't.
But it's true.
Well, no, it's not a hindrance there.
No.
Say that the body has moods, both the existence of the five arguments has moods, and that
mood is taking, is throwing you about, because your mind is somewhere watching in between
weak and confused in regard to it and appropriating it as mind.
For an arah, it's completely free, free from any appropriation, any conceiving, whatever
else, they truly remain just bodily moods.
In other words, whatever arises, it won't be a hindrance, and it will never develop to
the extent that he used to develop, because he used to develop, because he was a hindrance,
because he did take it as mind, and then revolve around it even more, and proliferating
it in further.
She'd go and set moods, or whatever, he will last, and then you just, he would take it
out of my mind.
Well, yeah, and then becomes mind, but like last, for example, it takes a while, like
sexual desire, for example, it takes a while before, it becomes a full-on sexual desire,
and when I say it takes a while, I mean, it takes some time of attending it wrongly,
giving attention to the sound of beauty, getting wound up, getting excited, and then, yeah,
then you can be in that state perpetually, or state of real will, but nevertheless,
they take time to develop, basically that developing means this kind of revolving, when you
don't have escape from the initial age of sexual desire, which is purely bodily, because
for as long as there is a body, for as long as there is a prostate organ and penis and
everything else, there will be a possibility of an age, and that's all third.
Obviously, the whole significance of the sexual organ's centrality and everything else and
the whole appropriation of that means it's never seen just as an actual sometimes, but
again, even when it is, it's seen as my age, and since there is nothing preventing you
from stopping it, from not indulging it, people don't understand the danger of it
anymore, they do it, maybe not physically, but it do it mentally, they nurture it, they
cherish it, they entertain it, you give it to, well, yeah, you might be resisting, but
let's say a layman, yeah, you pull it, you take on the reins, not just, you go for it,
but it was purely bodily, and he always remains inseparable, imagine if there was no body,
would you be able to experience sexual desire, imagine if there is no mouth, no tongue, would
you be able to enjoy the tasty food, you wouldn't, you couldn't, inseparable from, so any
food that you ever enjoyed, any food that you are enjoying, any food that you will enjoy
is completely bound to your tongue, literally, it's completely bodily, because of that, it's
entirely bodily, because all the other limitations can happen to come and go, but this remains as
a necessary condition, presence of a working time, working eyes, working ears, but that's
not a problem, because if eyes, and what they see would be a problem, if tongue and the
taste would be a problem, removing the tongue would remove the problem, but none of it is
the problem, your mind is not a problem, your thoughts are not a problem, so the craving
in regard to it, the assumption of the body is mind, well, they all comes out of it, mind
and conceit and craving, all the walls are on the same thing, ignorance, you can see,
you take it as yours, you're taking me, then you become, you know, that we chase after
the counterpart, so for as long as you are identifying with your masculine body, masculine
sexual order, masculine possibility of sexual pleasure, of sexual pleasure in general, you
will be bound by that pleasure, even if you are Australian, even if you spend your life
as a celibate restraining, if you don't sever the connection internally, you will remain
bound, you will remain essential domain, I mean, just saying no, but you're not, yeah,
you're not actually freeing yourself right, saying no is the first step, but it's the
first step they cannot enable you to see, you escape, no, it's not you escape yourself.
Because if I step back in reflection, when I look at the body that appears in whatever
form it appears in, it might be a sensation of it, well, if it's a breathing or the,
see, that's already, your body was already there before, because that sensation was being
possible to be manifested because the body was already there, but I don't see it, because
you're not mindful of it, because, and another reason why you don't see it is because,
for you, only that particular manifestation of this or that, the manifest the body is
the manifestation of the body, but if you develop knowledge that actually, any of those
particular manifestations are possible only because the body is already there, that thought
the body is already there, starts to stand, begins standing for that which is the body
in your experience, in other words, that is your body in your experience, there is no
between.
The thought that the body is already there, yeah, because again, would you be able to think
anything about the body, if the body is not standing there?
But you can't know it any other way then, well, exactly, you can't access that through
the senses, sensation, sensations of touch, sight, sound, smell, that's all sensual, that
all comes to senses, and that's usually the criteria of what exists, put in your body
comes to existence much more than that, so, but when you know, all those things are possible
only because the body is already there, and that body is already there, because you're
thinking it, you realize, ah, that's how the mind comes first, because this all precedes
it, that thought of the body preceding them is a real thought, is your body, that is
what your body is, at that level, at that time, again, you can go back to the, so the
put on the mindfulness of the bodily portions, you're seated now, your body is in a certain
position, so whether you look at it, whether I'm telling you about it, whether you're touching
the chair, that's all because you're seated already, and in a sense that cannot, that the
body is seated, is a thought, but then what else would you expect it to be, because all
of the sight, sound, smell, stasis, touches are known because the manifesting mind are
there also thoughts that correspond to respective senses, but sensing itself without the mind
is incomprehensible, so thoughts that concern your sight, are thoughts of your sight, or
of your eye organ, if you want to put it like that, that's why there are six different
types of consciousness, there are six different types of thoughts, you can say it like that,
they're different, they all appear to be looking the same, but they're bound to different
things thus they're different, thoughts about a smell, or it seems just that, thought
about a smell or thought about a sight, it's a thought, and yeah, there is in common,
they're both thoughts, they're both potential to mind, but they're different thoughts, in
the nature, one is bound with the eye organ, another one is bound with the nose, or then,
so a thought of your body being there, mental is bound with the presence of the body, with
a six sense base, with the entire thing, so keeping the thought, you're going to even keep
it actually, that's the thing, that's how you develop mindfulness, it's not constant
keeping in your mind, because I was driving mad eventually, it's recognizing the different
layers of that generality, whereby things appear, so you have particular things while you
are seated on the chair, what you're doing, holding something in your hand, listening,
talking about all of that while you are being seated, but see if you forget that you
are seated, and then you continue on doing things while you are seated, and while I really
lost some mindfulness, but the thing is, you can remember it in a mindful way, they
would make your memory mindful, in other words, you might lose the actual awareness of
your eye and seated on this chair, but if halfway through whatever you were doing, you
remember, literally remember, that you are still being seated, and that is the anchor, there
was the anchor of your mindfulness, that memory becomes mindful, so that which you've done
in that time span, when you forgot, and I remember, that also is rendered mindful, why?
Because the position of a body thrown in the world, random, existing on its own, given
five aggregates, it's something you can never appropriate actually, yet your whole experience
depends upon it, and mindfulness of body, the postures reveal that, position, body, because
of which I can do, I can think, I can worry, I can be angry, I can be happy, I can be
angry, I don't mean because you are seated, because the body is there, seated, standing,
walking, lying down, it's just like a little extra reminder of a body in there, and that's
always the, those are always the foundations of your experience, no matter how great, how
lowly, or how depressed, or how lately your experience might be in general, the fact is,
it all requires a body to be there, but I can recognize the posture, yeah, you recognize
the posture, but the thing is, you can't keep it actually in front of you all the time,
because other things will start arising, because that's just how things work, so that's
another point, everybody can, like the person, the people, the touching, touching, walking,
sitting, sitting, they all recognize in the posture, but that's another point, the point
is to recognize it, and then let it go, let it go where everyone wants to go, and as long
as you don't stand up, you hold those mindfulness of the fact that you're seated, so you don't
actually have to be trying to be mindful, you're mindful, but your body is mindful, which
is how dead mindfulness can, well, can never lapse, or lapsing with dead mindfulness becomes
less and less occurring, so the other one has the supreme mindfulness, why?
Because even when he forgets, that forgetfulness is mindful, because it's in regard to particular
things, but his body is situated there, in one posture, the other, and that's his mindfulness,
but the person has to anchor the cells back and back, in the beginning, he was seated,
and then you find yourself, you drift, you drift off, yeah, okay, but I'm still seated,
and I'm still seated, yeah, see, the problem is, with that, people keep over doing it,
because you don't know which is supposed to achieve, so that's why I said, understanding
mindfulness will make you mindful, so you're seated now, and you're mindful that you're
seated, and now you're drift off, but at any point, or feel drifted out, I ask you, are
you sitting, are you sitting, or are you seated? You would say yes, so the knowledge of
the body position pertains to the body, and it's there, with the body, so that's why
you can afford to forget it, in that mental keeping it in front of me all the time sense.
It's basically recognizing the peripheral, to the extent necessary, that things don't,
to the extent necessary, that forgetting particular things, doesn't induce general non-mindfulness,
you can put it like that, so you might have lost a particular thought that I am seated
here now, but you are still seated here now, which means, even when you were thinking,
I am seated here now, there wasn't your mindfulness, the fact that you were seated right there
and then, that's where your mindfulness was, it could have been.
You see, if I, from time to time, the day I sit down, I do something specific, meditation,
mindfulness, it's a greeting. I say, well, I will, I keep that in mind, I'll be mindful
of my greeting, and I sit there for a while, but then I get up, I think about this, I think
about that. Then I might say, I'll be mindful of my body posture, I'll be mindful of my
feelings, probably mindful of this, but then am I, I feel that I'm aware of my situation,
my surroundings, the state of my mind, but then I have done, am I actually being mindful
of that particular thing? Yeah, because I'm greeting it, because you have to find your
body posture, your breathing, your feelings, whatever you want to be mindful of, you have
to find that within that general situation, not in front of it. So in that general situation,
that's how you have to start. Then within that, without abandoning the image of general
situation, you have to start discerning, feeling, you have to start discerning the presence
of the body. So this general situation, if I, yeah, I feel like I can, I'm aware of the
general situation, but I'm surrounded by it in a way. Yeah, it's in time, yeah.
And whatever, I think of as the body within that best dance of the world, pretty much.
And ever that can be a number of things, but it will all be inseparable from a body.
So ever thought of general situation, if I do have a thought of general situation, is that
not making it in front of me? It depends. Well, it's going to be in front of you, it depends
on how you attend it. If you over-attend it, under-attend it, misattend it. If you over-attend
it, it feels like it's behind me. Yes, that's okay. It can fit behind you. But then, if
you over-attend behind me, that can become in front of you. Because must my mind be split.
Well, it doesn't really matter that much actually. What matters is to develop the sense of the
mindfulness of wild, the two simultaneous layers, if you want to put it that way.
Well, if it is all the bodily and mental, you can put it as crudely as that. But then,
obviously, both bodily and mental are mental in a certain way. But there are mental things
that pertain solely to mental and their mental things that are bodily. Thus, mental is
split into bodily and mental. So, in that sense, everything is, your mind comes first,
just without the mind, it's in Krasil, but not everything is entirely mental. But even
the whole thing of body and mind will not be able to stand if there is no body that
is conscious out there for the end of the minute in the world.
What would you say is, is it partly worth the situation?
Well, it's, yeah, I suppose, because you have to start from the stage of protugener, so
being contacted, everything is manifested. That would be the original situation. But
recognizing the original situation, you can eventually go through it. Literally, the
discernment through it, you know, left, right, the ball will be right through it, and that's
how you cease to regard it as mind. So, then you're not contacted.
But there is two arising. Yeah, so, protugener situation is contact. But situation would
pretend to arise, arising in person the way of the five-year-olds. But if that touches
you, if you make it mind, then you're contacted by it. If it doesn't, then you're not.
Then, if the situation, the general situation, you said that, that's what it is.
So, I guess, before I forget, I forgot it once, what did you say? You can induce the
mindfulness for general situation, and while you're mindful of the general situation,
let your body do things. Walks it, moves about. While you're mindful of the general situation.
Because that indirect way of seeing that body, not directly doing it, but that thing you do,
while you're looking it through the mindful general situation, is one among the bodies,
one among the experience of the bodies. Every mindful of the body.
And that's how point of one upon a satin, through doing breath, you do other things through
this thing, which means, there'll never be directly done, there'll be indirect observe
while they're done. And what you feel there, what you perceive there, what you do there,
is a feeling, is a perception, is something that's been done.
So, you have to start recognizing that indirectly peripheral is seeing something remotely,
still stands for that thing that you're seeing remotely, not just directly in front of you.
That's how mindfulness develops. So, while you're mindful of the entire situation,
your body's seated there, on its own, almost as if it has its own existence,
independent of you and your general situation. So, to speak, not entirely.
But in a way, yes, because you don't have to be sitting to be seated, you're seated.
But there is something the body does, yet you don't have to keep doing it, same with breathing.
You can be doing the breathing, but the body's also doing the breathing.
So, you can be mindful of that breathing as well while you're mindful of the general situation.
So, as if, like, because you're mindful of the general situation,
you can't be fully absorbed 100% into breathing or sitting or whatever else,
and that's the whole point, to not be.
Because then you start recognizing it indirectly peripheral,
which is again, the reason why this whole Vipassana mainstream is completely wrong.
Well, yeah, they believe you can have 100% attention upon the one thing,
and you can't. That's why the frustration.
I think I'm trying, like I said, your mind has to be split, but I'm trying to give 100% to the birds.
Yeah, exactly. Your mind can be split, and then you can be trying to attend that 100%.
And it's impossible, because of all of the different,
because of peripheral and general and infinity of that structure, you can't have one thing.
Or other that structure is one thing, but you can't step outside of it,
and then attend it as one thing. It's impossible.
You can only see it from within, which means if we're already now mindful of it.
Let me see from a certain general situation, being mindful, being aware of it,
and particularly as the body of beings,
and then awareness of the mindfulness that's within that situation.
Yeah, as well.
Which is why, if you do it long enough, the belief that you can be outside of that situation will fade.
And that belief is psychiatry.
Where, by your sense of self, your personality is outside of your experience.
You just assume it, failing to see that that assumption is within this experience.
But if you keep seeing the situation in general, the entire situation,
within that, while your mindful situation, in my body, of what you feel or whatever, partially,
because you don't want to be fully absorbed, which you feel, because you forget about the situation,
then becomes apparent that, well, whatever arises within this, will be within this situation.
And if you do it long enough, you stop assuming that there can be anything out of this situation.
Good evening, your assumption.
Which is how the sense of self is then recognized, but, effortlessly,
and beinglessly within that situation has a phenomenon.
And if it's within that situation, it cannot be the owner of that situation,
it cannot be the creator, it cannot be the master.
So, you abandon out the bother like that, which is the belief that your self is far more superior than your whole experience.
Yes, you can see this.
Because if it's manifested, it's impermanent for ever a reason.
And now you see it manifested.
So, if you're mindful of the situation, I'll stop saying, the situation is general, because the situation is general.
So, if you're mindful of the situation, and then within that mindfulness of the situation,
keep a peripheral eye on what your body is doing.
There won't be anything left out, because whatever arise will be between the two.
And that's what we included in it.
And if you get used to that, or rather if you develop it to the insufficient extent,
then you can also see that they're mutually determining each other.
Your entire situation would not be manifested if this random body is still not alive,
sitting on the chair and breathing, being nurtured by food over our eyes.
And vice versa.
If there is no situation recognized as such, this body will not be manifested at all within it.
You can't even mention it.
You think that's an inconsequential?
Yes, it's inconsequential.
And really, that's the thing, thinking that that's all of the situation.
Yes.
Yes, yes.
In terms of the breath, when I say, I tend to the breath,
and I try to attend to that, as much as I can.
But I think you wrote it in the comments on meditation.
You're just sitting now.
You allow the body and the feet to arise, by themselves,
those feet to merge or arise by themselves, so that you know how long it can see them.
So they know how long it can see, they just arise as they do.
You recognize that with the rise, whether you can see them or not, which means my concealing becomes redundant.
So if I'm looking at the, if I'm dreaming, and I'm planning something like that,
breathing, breathing, breathing, I mean, I'm looking at the body.
Because the body arises and I look at this body, which I'm not supposed to conceive.
That's the feeling.
Well, again, you don't conceive it necessarily, just by thinking that.
Because, as I said, well, if you don't want to put something,
mindfulness of breathing is your situation.
I'm breathing.
That's your situation.
Within that, I'm breathing while the body is like this.
I'm breathing while the body is like that.
I'm going to breathe in while the body will be like this.
I'm going to breathe, feeling this, I'm going to be feeling that.
That's the whole point.
So if you start thinking about a feeling and everything, you can't afford that.
If your mindfulness gets developed to such an extent, whereby an act of breathing,
whether you do it or not, is where it's anchored.
And you are still breathing.
So then when you go back to the breathing, you go back as if it was always there,
because it was always there.
So you're forgetting, becomes mindful.
Well, rather, you're forgetting, becomes within the mindfulness.
So when you remember, everything is rendered as mindful memory.
Mindful memory means memory that will not injure serigen.
We may not ingest it, not...
Well, like, an hour and a half, can remember.
Stuff hit down when he was a pitugian.
But none of those memories will lead you to serigen anymore.
So when you forget about the breathing, but then you become mindful of the...
Well, when your body is mindful then, but the breathing is still happening.
Even if you're going to think about other things, when you get back to...
Or rather, let's put it like this, remembering that you were supposed to be breathing,
practicing mindfulness of breathing.
That act won't be like, oh, I remember something I forgot.
Remembering will just mean bringing you back to the breathing that is already there,
and was already there, and was happening all this time.
Thus, your mindfulness was already there, was already there,
and was happening all this time.
So remembering and forgetting, doesn't induce a region anymore
in regard to where was I, what was I going to start again.
He just means coming somewhere else and coming back to the other thing.
Which is what you do all the time.
But you don't know that.
So when you go somewhere else, you forget.
I, the assumptions of a region, everything else, the upper down, they prepared you to do.
Did you give us a start from...
Tell it really, looking at the situation...
Start the pattern, just take any of it.
You can start with any of it.
Here's the body here.
But there are so many different types of practicing body mindfulness.
Looking at dead corpses, is a form of self-pattern.
Why? Because a corpse.
A corpse in regard to which you feel no lust, you feel dispassion,
can be conceived without standing for a body.
Mine, body of others, body of both, internal external, internal external.
You can't, because it's entire evolution.
So in that sense, would be mindful of the attitude of the expression towards the body.
You're mindful of the attitude of the expression towards the nature of the body.
And you can do that by, again, being mindful of the situation while you're looking at a suba.
So don't go fully looking at a suba.
Like, don't give 100% attention if you forget what you are and what you do.
You're mindful of the situation and then look at a suba.
And keep looking at something you're doing while you're mindful of the situation.
So, peripherally, you are aware of it, but you don't go fully in it.
And then, as such, you start recognizing it through that indirect attention,
which is not.
Well, it's indirect only in relation to what you're used to be.
It's only indirect in relation to that.
But in itself, it's just a different form of attending.
Peripheral attending, without overcommitting, without fully conceiving, without going there.
And that body, that expression that it's manifested at that time,
through that peripheral attending, is one of among the bodies.
But it's one of among the bodies.
It doesn't require you.
It doesn't require mine.
It doesn't require me doing it.
Because you're balancing the thing.
Well, it totally did that.
So you just start recognizing it without taking it up fully.
And you'll make sure you won't take it up fully,
as long as you remain mindful of the two things.
The anchor.
You remain anchored.
You won't go fully because you're anchored.
You'll come near it.
And you can come nearer and nearer and nearer and nearer.
The stronger your anchor is.
The moment the anchor breaks, you get in there.
And you forgot about your anchor.
What about that?
I don't know.
You can look at awareness.
Like awareness.
That situation.
More situation.
Well, yeah.
You can say, my awareness, that's basically my situation.
Yeah.
Gender awareness without anybody.
That's my situation.
Obviously, just dwelling in my gender awareness.
Well, that becomes something you actually do.
And it becomes a particular thing, which means
that the background of it would be something else.
So now, you want to take up situation in regards to something.
In regard to your body, in regard to your feelings,
in regard to your mind for that matter,
which is almost like situation,
or in regard to the thoughts by the eyes.
Force of the patterns.
So if you become peripherally aware of your body within,
that's about within the situation with your mind.
Then even if you forget about your situation,
the fact that that body is still there,
that can become your anchor.
So you get anchored through the anchor.
And that's how mindfulness progresses.
Or expand.
So you take the thing you have with your body.
Well, then yeah, then that body out there,
then that becomes your situation.
Which means, you don't have to do anything.
For as long as your body is just out there,
your situation is out there, and your mind will,
because it doesn't require any attention.
Because attention means attention,
which means whenever you attend something,
there is peripheral.
There is actually peripheral.
Always, even if you give 100%,
which is actually possible, as you can see,
you can't give 100% of your attention to something,
because that would mean you're fully absorbed in that thing.
But there is always a background to whatever you're fully attending.
And that background is always something
that you peripherally aware of.
That's just how things are ordered,
that's just the nature of the aggregates.
So when you fully develop that knowledge,
it means you can be fully attending whatever you want,
your mindfulness cannot last.
Why? Because there is always peripheral.
And it's fully known.
That's why consciousness is to be understood.
Because that's the direction of consciousness.
Yeah, that's the situation.
So let's see,
what it's abandoning,
the injustices.
It was in the situation.
By attending properly,
which is the only somewhere that's properly attention,
being aware of knowledge of birth.
It means that no matter how raging your body is
in terms of anger or lust or whatever else,
well, now you learn how to see it indirectly.
Basically seeing it indirectly means seeing it as not mind.
Yeah, it was a cold cut, kind of.
And you can choose to go into it.
Exactly.
You know you can.
Unless when you become an anagami,
and then an anagami,
whereby even the choice of going back into it is fully understood,
that's even going back into it becomes inconceivable.
Of the choices.
Yeah, you can essentially have it in anger.
But they still have the subtle craving for presence,
craving for unpleasantness,
for absence.
Not pleasant.
Is it the self is on the general level?
Well, self is usually where you don't look.
But yeah, self never appears as an object that you can look at.
However, if you learn how to see things peripherally,
then that general sense of self is seen peripherally as such.
And as I said, it's within the situation.
Everything is within the situation.
Eventually it appears in some way.
Well, it always appears in that negative manner.
But the whole peripheral, the whole prospect of the peripheral
is a negative in regard to what you are used to looking in front of you.
Which is positive.
But there is always a degree of negative in regard to everything.
Which is why there is always a degree of self for a position in regard to everything.
But once you start abandoning actual and peripheral,
as mine, then that which was used to be yourself,
well, those things still keep manifesting.
But now they are not mine.
Thus there is no more self with mine.
You're not trying to find a self with me.
Well, yeah, you can't find it.
You can discern the phenomenon that's mine.
That's me.
That's iron.
Within the general situation.
But that's for another hand.
That just becomes a shape of individual that he is.
Phenological shape.
That used to be me, mine, and I was just this individual.
Yes, things keep going.
But things are establishments of mine,
then or something developed
or you can't do it,
while being mindful of the situation,
while having that proper attention of peripheral.
Yes, that's the direction for any establishments of mine.
You know, so it was whether genres or anything,
the scene of practice,
it's that through that development and that peripheral.
Because once you got that established,
then you can establish other things,
other particular things like compassion or whatever,
kindness.
I see what you mean, yes,
you can be dwelling in it more particularly.
You can take it, particularly.
Yes, literally, yeah.
To help undo things more faster.
Because when you are established in the general situation,
you realize, okay, now and beyond,
griefs and joys in regard to the world.
When you are in the state of that beyond,
then well, now I might as well,
since you can't make that body,
which is not mine, which is already there,
on its own, think things that are good for it,
such as compassion and everything else.
So then when I'm not mindful,
or if I fall back,
perhaps forget to get careless, fall back into the more wholesome environment
that I might poke it again as mine.
And then you keep doing it until eventually,
for an hour out, you can't even fall back anymore.
It's fully developed.
Which is how you can operate and exist,
like every other living being.
And you can't tell the difference externally.
Including the Buddha.
Like this.
Did he?
Something.
Something that people didn't recognize.
Something that people,
they were his followers, like that monk,
who never met him.
He said, teaching.
Yeah, in the book.
I mean, they spent that teaching.
How could he?
How could anybody,
show us a Buddha,
or another, at least,
with great powers that I can recognize?
You can't.
Because it's nothing to do with external, anyway.
Or very little.
I saw this whole story about the description of
how the Buddha's body was.
Oh, yes, about thirty.
Thirty-two or thirty-six months ago, remember?
Yeah, but it's hard to decipher that,
because he was looking at every Indian religion.
They have these.
They have the birth story.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
All sorts.
But it's irrelevant.
Yeah.
He liked it to do with anything.
Of significance.
Or the first person the Buddha met upon,
he's enlightened.
And he saw,
oh, wow, this monk, he's quite brave.
His senses are clear.
Confidently walking.
He looks like he might be enlightened.
So he kind of suspected.
He's just got a confident look.
The Buddha was emitting like a green line.
So he asked him,
oh, who's the instruction did you follow?
He said, no one.
I like it myself.
I'm fully enlightened by myself.
Nobody's my teacher.
I'm down the Supreme Leader.
And what is my say?
Yeah, right.
It's so big.
Like, laughter.
He may walk off.
It could be true, John.
And that's where the Buddha really is.
No.
If he approaches this.
Because he could have said,
yeah, I'm the greatest man in the world.
Because it will be factual.
He's the greatest in like every realm.
Not just this world.
This is the extent of being the Buddha.
So there was that.
He could have said that.
He wouldn't be alive.
He wouldn't be conceded.
He wouldn't be nothing like that.
But because everybody else is clouded by their conceit.
They could have not possibly seen it as anything other than conceded.
Which is exactly what it's meant.
Oh, really?
I was so big, my friend.
And walked off.
So then the Buddha reaffirmed.
He said, well, maybe if I approach it something
that they can all relate to.
Which is suffering.
Have freedom.
Because when he went there for disciples, when they asked him,
again, they saw,
he looks like he might be alive.
He was very confident in the way he moves and so on.
So they,
all who is instruction that you follow.
But he just said, well, there is suffering.
Who is suffering?
No, there is suffering.
He just refused.
I don't know.
Just let someone talk for months.
Stop asking those questions.
Have you ever heard me speak?
There's nobody else.
Well, then be quiet.
Thank you.
