Yeah, what is craving maybe? Like I said today, that craving, understanding craving was
seen, I was seeing it as very unattractive. So I started off with a super reflection and
came down to, what is unattractive in all things as craving in regard to that is disgusting
because of the things that it does. The things that it implies, things that it implies
you get caught up in. Yeah. The self, the whole mission is everything. Yeah. So cravings
is unattractive. Well, there is how it should be really. All of the things, what approach
you take, it will end up leading to the same conclusions. And that's like how I don't
have to come in. It's just, whatever, some people have become skilled in sense-based,
skilled in this. All for the purpose of just revealing the same things. So you're not
going to develop any new insights. You might develop new aspects of the same insights,
depending on what approaches you take. But the point is you just, to pursue whichever
aspect you acquire till the end, till the craving is gone and you're another. It's all
the lighting. Well, yeah. It's kind of inseparable from what we spoke about the light in the
nature of craving. If you take the light for granted, you crave. If you don't even
see the light as phenomena, the reason, what is the light? The joy, the light. That's
already means craving is there. So the important thing is to not fall into a trap of thinking
linearly. Like, oh, first I felt, then I had the attitude of craving, then I'm delighting,
then I'm as holding, then I get attached, then whatever there is now. It's all like within
this, when this, this is, it's all the pateats of a father. So you might describe different
aspects differently. But the point of it is that simultaneously present. So, presence
of feeling means presence of craving for a putugina. And you can think of it, even in terms
of, like what we spoke just a couple of hours ago, keeping yourself to, keeping yourself
bound to a domain of centrality makes you not able to whatever arises in that domain.
So keeping yourself bound to the domain of feelings makes yourself liable to whatever
feelings arise. So even if you don't necessarily go after the feelings, the fact that you feel,
that feeling is appropriate, that feeling is mine, feeling is me, feeling is I am, makes
you liable to the other possibilities of that feeling that you're appropriating now. So
when that changes, you won't be able to escape it. When that feeling changes, you won't
be able to escape that change. So you'll be affected by it. In other words, if feeling
changes for even more pleasure, you won't be able to remain indifferent, you'll be pulled,
you'll be hooked in further. If feeling changes to explain, you'll be suffering, you'll
be affected. And the fact that you are affected in the first place, that's what already
what suffering is, that's what duke is. So the possibility, the fact that you won't
be able to escape the possibility when it arises, that's duke. Why? Because you have no control
of your possibilities. And that's the whole point. The sense of control can only be exercised
in regard to a tactile. And then you can stop like thinking about probabilities and coefficients
and blood, blood, blood, blood, just to give you the sense of control in reality. Possibility
always remains a possibility, which means it can always be otherwise, which means your
control is useless there. But the problem is, you're so used to control that you always
see possibilities as secondary as optional. But actually, fundamentally, structurally speaking,
they come before the actual thing. So, possibilities, not being able to control them, yet depending
upon them, that's what the nature of Sankara is, exactly that very thing. If it termines
everything yet, you have no say in it. Well, whatever you can determine, whatever you
can determine, whether you can intend will be actual, which means there is always something
possible in relation to which means you can ever like, uproot it through your intention,
you can ever take it up and really own it. Because the act of owning is already determined
by the possibilities of ownership, which you're not yours and cannot be owned.
And understanding it, a feeling to get you out as a domain of yours.
Yeah. Because you still feel that your view or your relationship is completely changed
to it. Well, there, then you can't really say that you feel, anymore, you can just say
feeling is there. But it doesn't exist, it's my feeling, which is what existence is.
So, I try to imagine how it is, it might be like a death and then in a separation. I think
my self will be winter, because you're feeling self is cold.
Well, when you look from the point of view of self, it feels like death, because you can't
even comprehend how can something be without existing. So, yeah, as a protusion that you
have to die, protusion has to die. And back onto the craving. It's inseparable from the
feeling. So, you can't just examine craving as a phenomenon separator. You can see the
nature, you can distinguish, you can discern the nature, but it's simultaneously present
with the feeling. But in order to discern the nature, to start discerning, the particular
difference between different types of cravings. And I'm in psychological exam, exam, exam,
just mean in pleasure, you have to recognize the nature of craving in regard to the pleasure.
Now, just like theoretically, start pondering on what craving is. But to see it really in
regard to the present, the arisen pleasure, and same with pain, and same with neutral
feeling.
So, the problem is when there's a pleasant feeling, people would dismiss the entire thing,
throw the baby out with the bath water. So, degree of it is not a problem, it's just pleasant,
it's just agreeable. What else there is what you do, that's what you should subduing.
So, through feeling, you can recognize the craving with feeling craving, which is why
it's partly, but it's on part of the description. While feeling craving, to be more accurate.
Because again, we say with people is I think you're looking left and right.
You have to be serious of feeling pleasure. Well, no, you have to kind of reverse engineer.
You have to recognize the cure, okay, I'm a cotugina, therefore when I feel I crave,
you don't see any of it. But that's the first thought, that's the starting point. Because
I feel I crave. So, obviously now the first reaction may be, oh, I must not feel, but
that's not a problem. The problem is that you crave. So, how can you feel without craving?
If you find that out, you'll feel from craving, craving becomes redundant, because you can
feel feeling irregardless. Feeling irregardless. Feeling irregardless of craving. But not knowing
the craving is redundant, you crave. It's a pointless thing, it's a pointless endeavor.
Yes, because no matter how much you crave for it or anything else, you'll never come
about there, what you crave. Well, yeah, it's that also. And also, it's just because,
yeah, the reason thing is indifferent to the flavor.
So a thing arises in ceases, whether you crave or not makes no difference. So your craving
is just like trying to interfere, but again, all your craving can ever accomplishes, again,
arising in ceasing, that is indifferent to your craving. So that's why our craving
can never be satisfied, yeah. But it can never even be, even the idea, the conception
of the idea of satisfaction is completely ignorant, because it just doesn't even pertain
to the same domain craving and feeling. It's not, if there were generally mixed, means
craving could affect the feeling, but it can't. It's just feeling nothing to do with craving.
So like the feeling is indifferent, it might even be to say too much, to make feelings,
it sounds like feeling does care in a little way, it's indifferent, but it's so, you know,
it's just saying something to everything different, it's almost saying too much, giving
it too much of a concern, even. It's so actually indifferent.
Yeah, I guess, depending on how you start designating terms, but when I say indifferent,
I mean, I mean, like, economists, and that's what the economy means. It doesn't mean
I acknowledge you, but I don't care about it. It means like, you just, it's impossible
to even acknowledge you, and then we let you, like, in unshakable economy it is. And
you recognize that aggregates cannot be acknowledged, nor can they acknowledge, because
they're actively self enclosed indifferent to each other. So just the idea of them relating
in any form can only arise from not knowing that they cannot relate in the first place.
That's how you assume the relation, that's what Upadana takes out the aggregates through
its own assumption, but they remain indifferent to it through and through for the whole duration.
They can never actually be accessed or affected. So creating is one of the unnecessary pressure
or jumping around. Yeah, unnecessary pressure, yeah, unnecessary lean, unnecessary kind of inclination.
And again, in the same sense, you can measure your craving because you're feeling you can
measure your suffering because of craving simultaneously presently inseparable. So if there
is pain present on account of something, it's not actually on account of that thing,
but it's an account of the craving that's present as it happens to be in regard to that thing.
So somebody says something that upsets you. You're not upset because what they said, what
they've done, whatever, what they've implied, but you're upset because in regard to that
experience as a whole, you are craving. Since it's unpleasant, you're craving it to know
not to be. So if you stop craving it to not be, the pain will disappear right there and
then that very moment, which is why often people get some relief through saying, are just
being the present moment or just accept things or just just open up and don't resist and
so on and so forth. But that's not enough. Like you can do that once, twice, 100 times.
You can do that whole life when you might have a more peaceful life, but that's not enough
to bring understanding. Because you know, every religion teaches that we're very often,
not every maybe, but quite often you hear that through various Guruji's or whatever else
or just be present, just not as is just accept acceptance and tell you, just love a Christian
love is a form of that kind of acceptance. You just love whatever comes your way and stuff.
But see, that is a rather like overriding, that's overshooting view. No, you should not
accept everything. You should accept only what you resist, but that which you don't resist,
you shouldn't be accepting further. So you can't apply the blanket acceptance because
there are different types of cravings. So craving is subtle than that. But then if you were
to understand fully correctly with the right view of craving is, then that would be the
end of it. You wouldn't have to do it because now you understood it and now it's gone.
But the only reason you have to each time accept things once they have a reason is because
there is no understanding in relation to their arising. So you still assume that they
can be craved, therefore you crave, therefore you override it through acceptance and you
let it diminish and then you feel dead. But it's like a psychological cycle almost.
The dharma should take you to the point and should be developed as such and say, wherever
you don't have to do anything in order to be free or in order to non-suffer. There was
always something that guided me. It always made sense. I had that even as a lab person
when I started. It was like, if it's a true piece, it's something that you don't have
to maintain. If it's a true freedom from suffering, it's something that doesn't require me
to keep doing it. Obviously, if you keep doing it until you reach it, but once it's fully
developed, you don't have to. So anything that was falling short of that cannot be the
ultimate truth. So if they say psychology or whatever, well, the pain arises or painful
memory sometimes, well, you should do this and then you should do that and you should
do this. And certainly, it helps in that linear psychological way. But the fact that you
have to do something in the first place, that's already a problem. But they people don't
see that usually. They just take that for granted and then deal with the problem. But the
problem is that you have to deal with the problem in the first place. That's already a big
problem. That's the biggest problem. That's what Dukar, this is, is. You are not it is
because you know that there might be something you will need to do. You will have to do in
order to be at ease. And that's making you uneasy. Yeah. So that's exactly the point
when it comes to craving. You know, I have to do this and then you gently soften or release.
It's just psychological battle that is revolving around the same view that it's failing to
see that the fact that you have to do anything in the first place is already a big issue.
It's the issue. All of this is circumstantial afterwards. But yeah, there is a degree of
truth in like, oh, when there is a resistance anger or accepting it, not resisting it
will cancel out the craving. But again, you can do that for the right reasons and you can
do that for the wrong reasons. If you don't know what the deal with the craving and the
feeling in there, if you have no concept of simultaneous dependence, but teachers and
Obama, you never see, you never do it for the right reasons, which is why somebody can
be quite evolved in that sense, but still be a protugina. He's still doing the whole
thing. Rightly, he's doing the banner for the wrong reasons. So his sense of why he's
still there. He's still there. He's still there. He's still there. He's still there.
Well, painful feeling is painful because you're resisting. So you know, okay, the first
I have to stop resisting it. But then you stop resisting it, the pain might disappear.
But you don't get fooled by that and then, okay, see, I fixed it, that's the fix. So each
time the pain arises, I'll stop resisting it. And then you develop this general view
that overrides everything. Sometimes it could respond to the nature of things, sometimes
it doesn't. The point is, if it doesn't even once, it means it's not the right view.
Right view is always the right view. So you should not be fooled by when you, yeah, you
just stop resisting it. You just resign to it. The pain is gone. Okay, this particular
pain is gone. Now, how will I reach a point where you want to rise in the first place?
And accepting, see, all of those psychological methods, the heat, you just accept it or
you do this or you do that. All that required thing to rise in the first place, which means
all that requires ignorance and craving in order to be able to deal with ignorance and
craving temporarily. So that's why it's not satisfactory for somebody who wants to be free.
And that's why it doesn't pertain to the nature of the four noble truths. Because four
noble truths are more than just, oh, you just accept or you just don't indulge. That's
anybody can do that and see the degree of worldly benefit in it. No, you have to have a direct
simultaneous insight into presence of craving, to the extent that craving is present, to
that extent suffering is present. Because the only reason accepting in regard to pain
works is because it cancels out the craving. But accepting it, oh no, I'm welcoming it,
that's actually already overdoing it. You don't need to go that far. But because you don't
know, you go that far and as it happens, going that far also passes the craving and cancels
it out. But then you keep walking much further than you have to. In other words, it happens
that accepting also cancels out the craving in regard to the unpleasant feeling. But if
you are to understand that the presence of craving means presence of suffering and you
just abandon craving, then you don't have to accept anything, nor refuse anything. Because
the attitude of accepting and refusing is aimed at the thing out there. You see what I mean?
Like the path that you cross, the distance that you cross in an act of accepting, something
that bothers you, happens to also walk past the degree of craving that is somewhere there.
But you have no idea what that craving is, so you just go the whole distance and then
the craving disappears, sometimes. Not always, obviously.
Because it really might have changed anything. Well, exactly. Or you might have been walking
in a different direction. You might have been thinking accepting the wrong thing and craving
applying to something different. So when you get it right, you get it for the wrong
reasons. In other words, you don't know why you got it right. But if you recognize it,
and then again, again, because of that, accepting people to develop this general plan can view,
so then they just accept everything. I love everyone. And then I pretend that people
are not bad. But if you were to see that actually, it's irrelevant. What happens to you?
It's irrelevant whether you accept it or not. What is relevant, whether you crave or not?
In other words, what I was saying before is, there can be craving, sorry, accepting and
craving, accepting or refusing implies craving. But there can be craving without accepting
or refusing. So you can't accept or refuse as a pathogen without craving. But you can
still crave without accepting or refusing. Because craving is more promoted than act of accepting
in regard to particular thing or refusing the particular thing. So you just know. So you
might do that initially, because your mind is not subtle enough. But the point is to take
you to the point whereby you recognize that the craving is problem, and that's what
a solution is. So abandoning craving then will prevent the problem from arising in the
first place. And then the act of accepting or refusing will not be active or accepting
or refusing through craving. It will just be agreeable, disagreeable. And also, by knowing
where the real problem of craving is, you won't have to pretend and try to cover everything
up and paint in your blanket view. Oh no, no, no, he is a good person. Oh no, he means
well, he means well, no. He acts like a foolish idiot, and it's a fact. But you're not upset
in a car that even if he's insulting you, because you don't crave. Or rather, a recognition
of someone's innocence, stupidity, aimed at you that is offending you, that offense won't
cause you suffering. You can recognize this is disagreeable, but you won't suffer on
that account, because you won't crave in regard to what is disagreeable. And you still
don't have to accept what he's saying. Why would you accept it when you know it's loads
of nonsense? Why would you have to pretend that he's good? So people do that because they
don't know what to do. Same where we spoke about the super, by not recognizing the super
nemitana, super nemitana, and dealing in the level of significance, people need to, they
overshoot the mark and they look at the decomposed bodies and stuff. That helps initially in
the same sense, accepting good health initially. But only so, that you can be able to recognize
it actually, the problem is way beyond this. The problem is that I'm moved in the first
place. So I don't want to have to go and run and look at the pictures of decomposed bodies
whenever I have lost the rising. But it's way too much last when I got careless. Then
it can help snap you back. But the point is no, the mind needs to be established in regard
to beautiful or ugly, as something that is ugly, as something is unwanted. And that's
where dispassion is reached. And then you can have all the beauty in front of you. The
mind is beyond it. The mind sees it as it is. But if you each time keep running back to
the pictures in a super, you have a nice little collection and it will work less and less.
And it's exactly this accepting attitude. I'll just just be present and accept whatever
comes your way. It can come as a revelation to somebody who's never present and never accepted
anything that comes his way. And then to accepting it, he does actually accidentally as well,
doesn't crave. But that's only initially, because he just took the whole box, but sooner or later
that will wear out. And then it will stop having that effect. Because then you start craving in
regard to that, craving doesn't stay always in front of you. So in the same sense as a subo,
it shoots the mind, if done improperly, accepting or refusing, or at a fused pleasure will mean
you deny all the pleasure. Pleasant feeling, you think the pleasant feeling is the problem,
you deny it, you think the painful feeling is the problem, you accept it. But neither painful,
nor pleasant feeling, the neutral, are actually the problem. So you have no craving in regard to
what you feel. If the bad feeling arises on account of what somebody said, you can see it clearly.
Oh, what he said is right, I was actually wrong. So this agreeable feeling is the result of
something wrong that I've done. Like sometimes when other hands are reprimanded by the Buddha.
But because it won't be any craving, you won't take it personally, you can't, it's inconceivable.
So your behavior will just be modified according to it. Oh, this is right.
Or if they just criticize you, and there is a disagreeable feeling on account of the world you're
hearing, and you realize they have no idea what they talk about, they're the losing ignorant
angry person, you will not at all, you thank your brother, thank you, you're here, no, you know. And
that's a fact, and you don't want to be there, so you are the dismissed them, or leave yourself,
you don't have to deal with any of it. It's being crazy. Either way you won't crave, being
praised, pleasure, you won't be taken by. Sometimes praise is a fact, then you can confirm it,
as the Buddha did. Yes, I am the greatest, thank you. But sometimes the praise is for completely
the wrong reasons. And you won't be intoxicated by either of it.
You can find a black now, there's no intense, like I was, intense feelings, or I can't notice any intense.
No, there's an intro feeling, and there's the hardest one to recognize,
craving in the north and there, and as we spoke before, craving in our intellect,
like resting, feeling secure, feeling safe, feeling calm, feeling peaceful,
unless it's the piece of an era, and then it's not the piece.
So you should not relax, you can lay down and sleep, but in turn,
your mind should never relax, because it doesn't need to relax, that's the whole point.
Body needs to relax, body needs to sleep, the mind doesn't. It doesn't at all.
Now I'm really tired, I need to sit down. You sit down, but with your body sitting down,
your mind sits down. But there isn't an excuse for that. That's what the Buddha meant when he said,
the consciousness should not rest and get established upon anything. Like a cow,
if it leans onto the wall, it's eaten by the insides, it leans on the ground,
it leans on the tree, it's eaten by whatever it leans on.
And that doesn't require effort, right? That doesn't require, you're like,
you know, clenching your teeth, I can't do it, not at all. You're just an attitude of mind
in regard to laying in your bed all day.
You just have to have that mind. That attitude requires mindfulness, which is why mindfulness
is always needed. You can have that too much. And mindfulness to the extent that
the consciousness is the biggest. Yeah, the existence, exactly. Mental drilling,
making that mental effort. It doesn't cover your body. Sometimes you have to get up,
keep walking, don't just go to sleep again, because often people give in to sleep as a form of
mind goes to sleep. If you go to sleep only when your body really leads to sleep, that's fine.
But if you go to sleep as a psychological result of, you know, you don't want to deal with stuff
for, the mind is resting. So I like to come back from work, open a can of beer, and you know,
watch my favorite TV program. I deserve it. I've been working eight hours a day, I need to rest.
That's obviously the coolest example. But you can, you know, leave an equity without a TV without
anything. And yeah, I've been meditating for 10 hours, and I'm going to go and sit down and
have a cup of tea and rest. Sure, do that. But that's still not an excuse for your mind to sit down
and rest. No, it's an excuse that when you're busy for your mind to go and get busy.
I think to see the distinction, this is my body, and we'll do what it has to do, what it needs to do.
And keep your mind alert in regard to it. That's what mindfulness is about the means basically.
This means you're like a robot touching means basically you're mindful in a way of whatever
your body is doing throughout the day and night. Action's intention and stuff, you're mindful
in regard to it. So you don't lay in it, you don't come into it, you don't become it.
Yeah, that was a good, a good night, some good days. You can't play it, can't play it. And then
when you're laying down. Yeah, you can give up. Stop pounding letting that. You'll be working all day.
I will continue. Well, whatever if the continues are not, that's fine. That's on its own.
But the only thing you should be concerned when you're okay, I've been making effort all day,
I can't do it anymore. That's fine. Go ahead and have a break. Physically and mentally,
so to speak, but don't allow your mind to rest in that rest.
Yeah, always keep an eye on it, because that doesn't require a terrible zero effort, because the
eye, the awareness, the degree of awareness is always there. Always you be dead. So that's why
mindfulness comes with understanding of what mindfulness is. The awareness is always there.
That's why awareness is always there. No, a degree of awareness is always there for as long as
you're alive. That's how it gets work. So it just means that whatever it's arising,
there is a degree of awareness in regard to it. Otherwise, that thing would not be manifested.
So you stop doing the awareness, I'm aware, I'm mindful. You just recognize it as coming,
being implied in the things. So the mind never forgets that, and in that way, you never lose
mindfulness even in the act of forgetting. You forget something particularly, you don't forget
the nature of forgetting. And that resting, that welcoming, is delighting. That's what the
life is here. That's always, it doesn't delight, it doesn't welcome. That's what I have to do.
You've been sleeping all day and wake up and you still feel a crap and you can't get up.
You're just physically wiped. So you go back to sleep. That's fine. As long as you don't welcome
it internally. Don't welcome anything internally. That doesn't mean you have to stop doing it externally.
So there is a distinction. So you don't welcome it. And through that non-welcoming,
if it was generally bodily tiredness, yeah, you'll sleep. But if it ain't, it would become apparent.
I don't know, I'm not actually sleeping anymore, which means it wasn't bodily. It was something my mind
wanted to do because there was no other distractions to keep me up engaged. So I just couldn't deal with
boredom. But then when you're bored, fine, we're bored. Don't do anything. Don't welcome that.
You can keep not doing anything. Never welcoming for a second, or you can keep doing it, but
oh, I want to let our want to go for a nice place and walk climb the waterfalls. It's fine. Don't
welcome it. Don't welcome it in the beginning. Don't welcome it at the end. Don't welcome it for
the only time in between. So the mind always remains alert in regard to it. And that's effortless.
Does it require any of it? In the beginning, obviously, it would feel like, you know,
I'm spoiling the party, but it's just because you're over-shooting the mark, initially, so you're all uptight.
Well, don't welcome that. It's a great one for being, when knowing being, it's just that. That's the feeling.
Well, yeah, craving for being, craving for non-being, craving for sensuality. Basically,
craving for sensuality is craving for being, or non-being through the senses. So it's even more
proliferated. For particular thing, craving for particularness of particular that means
sensual craving. Now you can stop craving in regard to particular object, particular objects of
your senses, and then you abandon the central craving. But then you still have the more subtle
craving for being and the absence of being, non-being, craving for A phenomenon to be or A phenomenon
to disappear. So it's still subtle kind of affinity and resistance.
Obviously, much subtler than actually fully developed craving for central objects, or
absence of them, if they are unpleasant. But it's still the same age, so that's why Anagami is
not free from those regards to craving. You can't love and hate, which pertains to the
infatuation or revulsion in regard to central objects. But you can still experience
craving in regard to phenomena and absence. It doesn't mean craving for the whole
he delights in the dharma. No, no, no. Badia was affected by that woman laughing at him.
Didn't hate her, because he was affected by it. He craving for non-being or that experience,
which is what sent him out, and made him realize.
And say, like when Anagami's don't lay Anagami, they don't become because
or be coonies and go forth, is when they still, well, they crave for the notion of the sense of
duty in regard to their family. No, that's the right thing, that's what I want to do.
So they stay to look after their parents, and that's why they don't become adults. But they're
bad to sexuality and everything. So I forgot, in the day, making craving myself, well, I mean,
there's back in the morning watching for that. Well, you can't see your craving directly.
It's not like, oh, there's Anagami, stop doing it. What you have to watch in the back of your mind
is whether you delight in acceptance or delight in aversion. That's what Anger offers a form of pleasure.
He says on me, and you feel angry, and then you delight in telling them all for, or, you know,
revenge, payback, or ranting about them to somebody else's gige for relief.
Yeah, yeah, he's like a sifla guy, he's like a guy, you're delighting in that.
So in order to not crave, well, you can offer sure that there is a suffering present craving is there.
So how can you indirectly, directly do it? If you know what I mean, it's an
indirect action, but if it's fully known how it can be done, it can be done directly, in its indirect nature.
Yeah. Yeah. Watching the light. Well, you watch the light. That's something you do.
Oh, I'm welcoming it, therefore I will not welcome it. Through that welcome it, you cannot crave it.
Through that craving, the suffering won't be there. But then you also need to recognize that,
because the degree of this pleasure will still be there, but that's not what suffering is.
So that's why the understanding is like the core of the whole thing and the reason for liberation.
Somebody can do this, but without understanding, without being able to discern what he's told to
discern, I discern the pain, I reason on its own, from the suffering. Unless you discern that,
it is the same thing, basically like two sheets of glass identical, unless you know that they're two,
you won't know that they're two, because it's just one thing. And there is no difference between the two,
but except that they're two, and that's the difference.
Too much suffering in pain. Yeah. Physical pain. Well, like see that when you say physical pain,
people usually associate a bodily sensation, or that's unpleasant. No, that's not physical pain.
Hearing somebody shouting abuse of you is a physical pain, because it came through your physical
ears. Seeing a disgusting image is a physical pain. Or it's pain or isn't regard to what,
yeah, having a lunch chopped off is also physical pain. Now mental pain isn't regard to any of that
type of pain. When your mind is affected by it as well. Well, there is a feeling of am I bothered
on account of feeling unpleasant? Do I feel an urge to deal with it? Means, oh, I'm craving.
There is a craving present, and that's the reason why I suffer. And that's the problem. Not
the unpleasant feeling, it has a reason. That's why when it says, it's like he develops three, four
knowledge and becomes an art hand, and he recognizes any disturbance that is left with me now,
will be disturbance in a kind of this far sense, or on kind of this body. And that's often said,
oh, just endure unpleasant words and abuse or ever done. Just endure it brown when you're done.
He said that, why would the woman need to say that to Uncle Himal? I mean, he was already in
our hand. That's what you would think, wouldn't you? No, you're just reminding him,
because there is, there would be still this pleasure, but none of it can ever even
be remotely conceived, pain like suffering, which is what pain is. This agreeable feeling is not
pain. Not wanting this agreeable feeling, that's what pain is.
Yes, you could overshoot, let's say, by feeling a cramp in your leg, me, it's not too twisted.
Yeah, I'll endure it, I'll endure it, okay. That's already misplacing, you're thinking it's
out there, so do you know? What you should do then, you should move, and then recognize the pain
of the guilt, then arises an account that you couldn't hold up your determination to not move.
That's what suffering is more likely to be found, than enduring in your twisted joint,
and then turning yourself into an invalid, because you're such a keen meditator.
The anxiety, the hollow feeling that arises on the fact that you could not hold up
the determination that has a reason I will not move, I moved. Oh, what is that showing?
You were not in control. That's very unpleasant, that's what suffering is.
So let that arise, don't bother torturing your body, and twisting your knees, and
pushing the nails through your skin, or whatever else they do.
No, let the guilt, let the anxiety, let those painful mental feelings arise, because they all
have in common suffering, there's no doubt about them. You can suffer in regard to the body,
what you heard, but when it comes to this type of suffering, that is always suffering,
which is why those things cannot arise in the naran. This agreeable feeling can arise on the
account of somebody shouting abuse at him. A agreeable feeling might arise on the account of
somebody praising him. None of those things will induce lust or aversion anymore ever again,
and certainly he'll never have experienced anxiety, guilt, doubt, and all those mental painful
feelings. So there is that difference between mental and bodily, basically just means
on what account has in a reason, but every feeling is a mental feeling. You don't feel feelings in
your body. Oh, I feel something in my back, no, you perceive something in the back, you feel in
regard to your whole body, or particular aspect of your body. Oh, I'm about to lose my hand.
I feel very scared now, and I'm very, very afraid.
And that's what hurts, not the perception of whatever is happening in your hand.
And when I get in that, I couldn't feel any physical pain, but it's painful.
Yeah, you've got that. The body is, you know, pressure, you just keep moving here and there.
You know, it's leaning back, so you know, it's scratching, and that's annoying. That's the problem.
So I try not to scratch or just try.
So you might initially not want to scratch, just because, oh, you're not sure where to look for the craving,
or where the problem is. Where the problem is not the need, the problem is not the
arising of ditch and the scratch. The problem is whether you imply cravings for doing it,
whether action constantly implies craving, in which case it's an action, it's a karma.
You remove craving from action, then karma ceases to become, then it just
responds to things, significance, intentions, that's it. You have to be careful in doing things like
you should put up with it, and you think you can't stop there.
But you haven't, does that mean if you can't be on it?
On the server, you know, because something else comes from it. No, that's why, like, in the
service, some, some, some monks, you know, needed ascetic practices, because they would be making them
genuinely look at the right direction, in the right way. Some didn't. Some actually was completely
counterproductive. Through ascetic practices, for them, they were overshooting them up, and they
could not see it. Which is why applying the blanket, we should all be doing this, we should all be
doing as ridiculous. I mean, big to happen, or do something really dramatic, to see, okay, I understand, create, I suppose,
naturally things will happen, and are quite dramatic, so it's quite intense, we use them, or whatever.
Or even if that doesn't happen, the faith that it can happen, if you dwell on it, they will become
dramatic in itself. But that's how people lose their minds. They don't lose their minds when
painful things happen to them directly. They lose their minds when they start gradually,
when they get eroded, by the recognition of the possibility that they are completely exposed,
and again in time, and again in a second, absolutely anything. It freaks you out.
When something bad happens, it's right in front of you, it's painful, or whatever, but it happened.
But the red is substitution. Yeah, exactly, anticipation. Which is what it's meant in the soot
as being prey to suffering. So you don't actually suffer, or you don't have to suffer, but you recognize
that you are prey to suffering, like descending upon you, so to speak, for whatever reasons.
You imagine, how would you feel if you were a prey? There isn't a problem in front of you,
but you just feel like at any time, something can pass on you, and hunt you down, and get you like that.
So even if nothing does, the fact that this, that's what brings you, makes you mad.
The anticipation in the war, like when people are in war, that's when you know, they go gray,
and lose their, you know, age 50 years overnight, because they're weight of my diet.
It's much easier when the fight breaks, start, oh, it's right there in front, so you just
fight or not, but it's the anticipation of the fight. Let's say it's the same age, anticipation
of the suffering. He feels his prey to suffering. That's the scary, not the fact that you suffer.
Well, that's also painful, but the fact that you can't suffer again, and again, and again, and again,
and you will. So if there is, imagine, if there is, if you are a prey,
to something, if something is hunting you, constantly.
You always just think that the results will come when actually, well, it's there as well.
I do, I do try to bring it up there. Well, you have to come to brain death.
The possibility of the timing. Exactly.
Because you might try to bring it up in particular things, and might bring it up to an extent,
in regard to particular things, but you kind of leave yourself out of it through that,
that sort of incomplete contemplation. But if you start thinking about the fact that you die,
stop reading, drown. It's risky because it can really freak you out, but yeah, it does hammer it
back home. If you fear death, there is a feeling in regard to something like there is something
you are still holding, and to that degree you are alive. That gives you the, well,
it comes home. Motivation and it's sort of like delineates, delineates, that's what delineates, outlines
the problem, it reminds you of where the problem is. And that's, you know, that's what dumb is,
that's what dumb is. And you deal with that problem, you overcome death, fear of death, no particular
problem arising on the account of particular instance, you know, we can never bother you.
He's just going to be disagreeable with you, aren't they? Yeah, you left it all.
Because it kind of plays my dying, you know, I get pretty much like, and then I can process
all the same, you know, I sort of imagine it. Well, again, if you imagine it linearly in a process,
then it's not really a calica. Obviously, it can always be a calica, in a sense that any
linear process is present as such, as an elicent thing, and mindful of death means ah,
right there right now, so that is a calica. So no matter what stage of your linear contemplation
of death, you recognize, I will die. That's simultaneous.
Because you're not doing the contemplation so to actually die,
but doing the contemplation to allow that fear of death to arise,
and see on what level of your eyes is, and this is what needs to be dealt.
Because even that fear, if it's unpleasant, it's not a pleasant because of the dying,
and because of the fear, it's a pleasant because you crave, and you go, you so don't want it.
So you remove that, not wanting it. You don't welcome the unwanting.
And then you won't be afraid of death either. The only thing you would be, he's very
mindful, if the death comes. Or just the thought that will immediately bring the mindful,
because that's where mindfulness comes from, which is why, like Sartre Pan has been
managing throughout life, the moment of that, he will realize the fruit, because that's where the fruit is.
But I try to get just death, you know, because I know, but I do know that
is a possibility. I leave the situation, I get caught up in other situations,
and I go out, sit here, whatever that I caught up is interesting. I can't look at caught up.
I pick up a fire and I can feel a pool, or whatever that. So some of that I don't see with craving,
but I see the craving for criticism. Well, that's why you have to have that wisdom to recognise
off. The problem is still there. So whether I'm now using this environment to avoid the recognition,
and remind us that the problem is still there, or whether I'm using it to really practice.
And again, it's like how you eat your food, and why you eat your food. But you allow it to become
because it's natural, or where you keep in mind the real reasons.
