But then something else is your situation on the general level.
You see what I mean?
You are mindful that you are here in the cave sitting on the floor while they're talking the Dharma.
But now you can have a thought of you sitting in the cave on the floor talking Dharma.
And that thought is particular for you now.
While you're sitting in the cave on the floor talking about the Dharma, which remains general.
So it can be the same thought.
You can see it twice or doubly, simultaneously.
You can see the same thought on the particular level.
And you can see it on the same thought on a more general level.
That's immediate in reflection approach.
But again, it's the same structure, same principle, same generality.
What you should not do is confuse then the particular things for general and I think they are general.
Because they are particular.
And if you see them as general, then their general became particular and now something else is general.
Even if it's the same thing.
Either way, you lose the sight of the general, you lose the sight of the mindfulness.
It's very unnatural.
Because natural means ignorant.
Natural means going with the grain as the Buddha referred to it.
But the practice of Dharma goes against the grain.
Against the way of thinking.
That doesn't mean you kind of go mad and do crazy things.
Just means you start thinking in the opposite direction.
And this is the opposite direction.
The most common thing is me, my cup, I want to drink the water.
But now you start thinking indirectly.
I can drink this water only because my situation allows it as a possibility.
Water to be drunk.
So you start bypassing your sense of self.
You start making it redundant.
Because I want to drink water not.
The water is possible to be drunk because of the situation.
And that's why you can attend it.
So it is, my sense of self that comes with this intention, I want to drink the water.
Depends upon that intention, I want to drink the water.
Which is given by this situation that it's not in my control.
Therefore, my sense of self is something I can't control either.
Which means it's not my sense of self.
You don't have to define your situation.
You can just know your situation.
Because you are already in.
All this is given in the example.
As I said, the situation can be as general as you want, such as unseated.
And you don't even have to say it to thinking.
You just know already that you are seated.
So recognizing situation, it's almost like on the level of knowledge.
Because if I ask you, what's your body posture now?
You will know that.
You won't have to get up in order to tell me that you were sitting down.
You'll know your seat.
So it's already there.
So you don't need to keep it in the mind.
But yeah, over defining it means making it, approaching it in particular turns.
Which means you forget about general.
Wait a minute.
But the way I think, the way I think something about my situation about weight,
or it becomes particularly important to general.
It's quite difficult to see.
No, not to general.
Thinking is particular.
Thinking is particular.
Well, it can also be general.
Depends what you think.
Depends what how you think.
In other words, it doesn't mean that particular ceases.
As I said, particular in return makes the general possible.
The things that you see particularly, you realize, oh, it's because of this,
and my situation has a reason.
But then the particular things are defined as such because of your situation.
It's like two sticks.
You can't conceive them separate from each other.
So even for another general in particular, that all remains the same.
It's ignorance in regard to the structure, and taking it as mine,
and everything, that's gone.
But yeah, of course, yeah, that's how it works.
It doesn't mean that you go into general and everything in particular disappears.
Impossible.
It's quite difficult, I don't know.
But general particular is the five aggregates.
Potugina holds them.
Arun doesn't.
So general in particular is the structure.
It's the same in Arun and in Potugina.
Potugina holds it as a result of his ignorance.
So he has great version delusion, nothing else.
Arun doesn't.
So that's a difference.
This whole relationship of sitting in the room while sitting, talking to you,
it's the same for Arun or Potugina.
It's just the Potugina takes it as mine.
You're welcome.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, of course.
And it's because Potugina takes things as mine in regard to hunger or thirst,
particular or general, he suffers.
Arun doesn't take his mind, he doesn't suffer further.
For Arun, there's no serve build.
And how could you see anything something in Potugina?
You see, everything to me must become general for Arun.
Well, see the point.
The flowers can drink the water.
He's only possible for you to attend and go and drink the water
because he was available.
He was possible.
None of that, that's the same for Arun and Potugina.
There makes no difference.
That is indifferent to your sense of self.
The situation allowed for a drinkable water to be present.
And then, oh, I'm thirsty and I can drink the water.
So it makes no difference whether you take it as mine or not.
Because it didn't come from you.
It came from the general situation.
How does he feel?
If he's thirsty, he feels significance of thirst.
So then the water will make sense.
But he knows that the water and the entire situation originates external to him.
Nothing to do with him.
So whether he drinks the water or not, or while he drinks the water,
he won't think of me and myself and for me,
because he understood the entire situation
that already holds this particular drinking water experience in it.
He understood that is not self.
He's still young, actually very beautiful.
What makes me still I feel that why is it important to think this situation?
Because I think whatever it is,
because whatever you can feel,
it means appearing as a bubble in the mind,
whatever appears, I think if all of them,
if I can see clearly these things,
my control appears in everything.
Isn't it enough?
It's self then. What are you seeing just what's in front of you?
If these bubbles, if I can see that,
cannot support the same view.
Okay, you're seeing the bubbles,
but what is overseeing you're seeing?
Means I'm standing outside.
Means you're assuming yourself outside.
By assuming these things in front of you,
you put yourself out,
which means you don't really include your sense of self there.
So there is seeing, there are bubbles.
There are bubbles being seen.
So you're seeing everything,
but you're not seeing the nature of seeing.
If I could think that only I can think of myself as a self view.
This is my self.
If I can think that these bubbles only I can think,
they're really good at mind.
Then my mind, I am,
it's included in these bubbles.
Only because that only could come from the perspective.
Not quite.
No, no.
No, see, because when you say,
the fact that bubbles already arise for you,
no matter how you think them afterwards,
a sense of self was already there.
So you're just managing the situation,
as opposed to uprooting it.
Yeah, but you actually,
I never see any other,
really appearing as bubbles.
These are actually coring as mine, I am.
No, you will not.
You won't see that.
Because if the sense of self and sense of mind
was to appear right in front of you so clearly,
you wouldn't need a Buddha to become an Arant.
But then what did some coring as myself?
Well, that depends, really.
You can call any of the aggregates myself.
And the thing is,
you expect to find a particular thing
that you called myself.
But as I said,
my sense of self is never particular,
is always general.
So, but if using to look at the general level,
you'll never see the sense of self.
Because you expect to find it on the particular level.
And it doesn't appear there.
So no wonder you can't find the sense of self anyway.
But the fact that we can talk about your sense of self,
means there is something being designated as such.
Something very ambiguous,
unclear, general, non-particular.
And as such, it is real,
it is present as a phenomena.
So you have to start seeing it like that
in order to be able to understand it like that.
But if you're just used to seeing things in front of you,
bubbles, particular,
sense of self never appears like that,
which is why it's sense of self.
And that's why you can never see it.
But if you see your general situation,
which is where sense of self is,
you see that has fully determined
by these particular random bubbles.
Indirectly,
then you're already,
like, uprooting your sense of self
without directly looking at it.
Because you can't.
Whenever you look directly,
your sense of self is behind your look.
That's how it works.
It means need to see the relation.
How these bubbles appeared.
Well, no, that's not the relation.
See, that's the explanation.
How the bubbles appeared would be an explanation.
And the fact that the bubbles are there
means you're in the situation.
The fact that you're in situation
means bubble can appear as bubble.
Now, sense of self
lingers somewhere in between.
But you can never look at it directly
because it's always behind your look.
So then you learn to know
where it is without needing to look.
Because looking will hide it.
It means for me not able to see
what I'm calling myself or something.
No, directly.
Not as a particular thing.
You can know it indirectly
where your sense of self is.
You can't look at it directly
because look comes from the sense of self.
I was feeling that whatever,
what do I feel inside the body or in the mind?
Those things are actually
thinking as mine, myself.
My feelings, my thoughts, everything.
These all combine together.
I was thinking, here I am.
Well, even those things.
The sense of mind is in regard
to the things.
The mind is not in the things.
So in other words,
it's your attitude towards certain things
that is the attitude of mind.
So that doesn't mean that everything is yours.
It just means there's some things,
it's enough for some things
to be regarded as mine.
Sense of self is there.
Sense of self.
So even the sense of mind doesn't appear
clearly right in front of you.
It's also general in regard to
particular things that you took as mine.
Attitude.
What is attitude?
Can you see your attitude particularly?
Oh, here it is.
You can't.
It's an attitude in regard to things.
So it's a mental phenomenon.
Or just a phenomenon.
Done.
But it is always clear.
Everything else.
Well, yeah.
It doesn't mean that it's permanent,
but it means it's in regard to everything.
So when you're looking at things in front of you,
you're not seeing your attitude in regard to those things.
You're just seeing what's in front of you.
And that's why it's wrong.
You leave your attitude out.
But your attitude is that which needs to be changed.
Not the things.
Because they were not a problem in the first place.
So the bubbles, they're all bubbles, whatever.
But it's a attitude in regard to them
that you need to change.
Not them.
For pututina, always looking at everything
to the record.
Based on self view, everything is mine.
No, no, no.
No, it's not everything.
I am.
But pututina takes his, takes not self with self,
or takes self with not self,
or takes self with self.
But he cannot do,
what he cannot do is take not self with not self.
Is it something, I'm supposed to be looking at something.
Everything I'm thinking, I am looking at this.
But maybe he is looking at it.
Well, yeah.
In a way you can say that.
But he can think, I am looking at this.
But the thought of I am looking at this is not his.
It's not I.
It's not me.
There is no conceit.
That's all gone.
So then it's just a designation, I am.
I was thinking.
What do I do?
What do I do?
Maybe I was thinking, I am doing everything, looking at it.
No, that's like when you're trying to force the view
or already I and this on this.
But no, you have to find yourself within that situation.
And that's how you abandon it.
Like if you're producing things in front of you constantly,
you are doing that, which means that you, which is doing it,
it's not included there.
That's why I can never work.
But for producer, it's not a temper, you know,
you know, the record is, same view is already there.
The attitude in regard to the most fundamental aspects of the aggregates,
yeah, it's always the same, which is why it's a producer.
And when I say the most fundamental, I mean the most general.
So he might not be taking this particular,
this particular flask carpet cushion is mine.
But he's taking the whole general situation.
His body at least has mine.
Therefore, whatever situation his body ends up being in,
he'll imply his sense of self in it.
And whether through for me or not for me or me or both or neither.
So that's why he needs to be undone in that indirect manner,
through undoing the situation.
To see things actually, generally, in the record something,
I have to put something outside,
not to see something, like a...
No, the same answer.
You just have to discern it where it is, how it is,
without having to move it about in order to understand it.
To the extent the thing has a reason,
that's how and that's where you have to understand it.
That's discernment.
Discerning what's given.
The things given by you to discern within that what's given,
how, what's important, what's impermanent, and so on.
It's very new, actually.
This is the teaching of Venomanyam.
I don't really know how much this is now.
I think here it's within the same, same ideas.
But it's from the sutras.
You didn't invent anything.
From the sutras?
Yeah, of course.
Well, if you see all of this explanations you can find in the sutras.
Obviously, the sutras being so general,
like, you know, Bikobodi calls the sutras to support his three life interpretation.
Because he finds parts, they've nothing to do with it,
but he's on par, but he would call them for a petition par.
And then when he needs to, he would ignore the abstract principle,
just to support the view.
And the sutras allow that because they're so profound and so general
in the description that actually people can use them, misuse them.
Which is why, like, if you start thinking like this,
then you can start reading the sutras in this way.
And then they will read very differently.
Then they will become apparent why, like, one sutra is enough for all of them.
Even before understanding.
Before you were reading sutras in different ways.
Yeah, before I was reading sutras, I had everybody else does.
Like, kind of wise inspiration, but kind of product of folklore,
India, long time ago, ancient text type.
But then I started reading in the Vera.
Well, then I started reading extension philosophy
that was making lots of sense in terms of intention, action,
responsibility, feelings, anxiety, and so on.
Then I started reading in the Vera,
talking about the sutras in those terms.
And I realized, wow, you can actually...
Yes, you can read it as an ancient sacred text
that just produced poetic inspiration.
But you can also read it as an existential
phenomenological description of experience right here right now.
And if you stop and think which of those two ways,
either a romantic inspiration or a phenomenological accurate,
actual description of your experience,
which one of those two is most likely to make an around,
you realize it's the latter one.
If you read it as a description of the universal aspects of the experience,
whether two and a half thousand years ago, whether now,
whether two and a half thousand years later,
it's still the same universal experience.
You understand it like that?
Oh, yeah, of course.
All you need is one sutra to become an around,
if you fully understand it.
Whether it's been spoken two millennia ago,
or now, or ten millennia later, just makes no difference.
It's the same thing spoken.
And that's what the Buddha said when he discovered the Dalma,
he realized, oh, it's like finding an ancient path
that was already there.
He didn't invent himself, nothing.
So that's what I said to people like,
you know, you don't need to get into all the philosophy
and everything that he talks about.
But at least if you get the attitude towards the sutras from him,
you can't ask for more.
And how to read the art approach.
Yeah, it's very interesting.
Yeah, because then you read the sutras
and you stop and think about every single sentence.
Because as I said, you read our consciousness and do I even know
putting the sutras in my own terms what consciousness is?
I don't.
So how can I expect that that which I think consciousness is,
is that which the Buddha talks about when he says consciousness?
And then you stop and think further.
And you realize, well, if my thought of consciousness
would correspond to the Buddha's thought of consciousness,
I would be an other hand, or at least a sutra partner.
But I'm neither of those, therefore,
when I think consciousness, that's not the consciousness
the Buddha talks about.
So you keep drilling and drilling and drilling.
And then even if you read this, you come back to it.
And you read again.
Many times.
It's very interesting.
I don't know if I can't explain it in such a way.
It's very interesting.
Yeah, I don't know.
I haven't heard anybody speak.
So it's different.
In these 10 years.
You had no teacher, you said?
No, no, no.
No teacher.
But I haven't even heard anybody resembling
this type of approach when they speak.
This way of thinking.
So it's not surprising that you have no idea.
Through your experience and through your meditation.
Well, yeah, through experience, through meditation,
through the sutras, through the pondering and understanding,
you get to see where people come from when they talk about it.
And I haven't really heard anybody
even coming remotely from this direction.
The direction that I was talking about,
the direction that's implied in the sutras.
That doesn't mean that there aren't any,
but just I haven't heard.
There are some monks that don't agree with the sutras.
Some of them say that they are some of them wrong.
Well, yeah, exactly.
Well, that's the thing.
It was such a long time ago when they were spoken.
You can't prove, you can't disapprove either.
So when people come across some parts,
they can't come to terms with,
oh, they must have been introduced later.
It's like, well, yeah.
How do you feel? Do you agree with this?
I don't care.
I mean, it's kind of relevant.
I think it's a silly thing to do,
because unless you're a sotapana,
you have no criteria of what's right, what's wrong,
which is why you're not a sotapana.
Therefore, when you choose to ignore certain parts
because you believe that they were introduced or whatever else,
well, you're following your protrusion as criteria.
So it's, again, you don't know for sure,
but to be on the safe side,
you take it all.
You accept it all just so that you can practice
and hopefully get the right view.
When you get the right view, then certain things might become more apparent.
Oh, I don't really know whether this came later or not.
But if there are such parts,
they won't pertain to the demo.
It might pertain to some story
or some social relationship or something.
It will not pertain to the four noble truths
and the concept, the main concept, is just you won't.
Because if it does, you will know this is wrong.
This is not the Buddha.
Which is why when you read Mahayana sotras,
it's not a single Buddha word there.
Near it?
It's part of stuff.
I read at least the huinei and the six-part chat.
Six-part chat, huinei and hard sutra and stuff.
It was just very strange.
I mean, it's not debatable that it's introduced later
by their own teachers and preachers.
But the thing is, you know,
there can be things introduced later,
new arahats coming and teaching in their own terms.
It will still be the same Dharma.
And if it isn't, it means it's not.
They're not arahats.
And you can see that.
It's not a problem.
You see that when you are barapai, you eat or not.
You don't have to disagree in the sutras.
You must avoid it.
It depends.
If they're disagreeing with the key concepts,
if they're dismissing the teachers and the body,
you should dismiss Him.
You don't have to dismiss His scholarship,
but His views should be considered.
Again, as I said,
You know, needing to be a son of something, if you stop thinking about it well,
even as an abstract principle, but it's still a principle within which the whole,
the only reason it's abstract is because a person does not see directly.
So if anything, if you call something abstract principle means
that's something you didn't understand, which is why it is abstract.
It's abstract only in regard to its content, not in its nature.
So principle is principle.
Oh, that principle is abstract for me because I don't understand it.
So if everybody starts with this principle and then you have somebody comes
and dismisses the principle and gives you a different explanation,
you should be doubtful of that.
Or if somebody goes even further and blatantly says,
no, I disagree with that sort of.
Like, some of these sort of, I think that's all wrong.
Well, you shouldn't waste your time speaking to them then, if they say such thing.
Because some of these sort of does not pertain to any traditional,
any cultural, any product of the ancient India.
It pertains to the right view and the noble way for path.
So if somebody dismisses that, well, they're not really following the Buddha's teaching,
even if they're monks.
Yeah, generally, everybody's teaching if someone doesn't agree with it.
It's okay.
Yeah, that's different.
Because what they're not agreeing, they're not agreeing with an interpretation
of the Buddha's teaching.
They don't agree with the view of the Buddha's teaching.
You see, some are here, they don't agree with it.
Well, no, no, see, that's the thing.
They might disagree or they might not be able to comprehend all of the things
in a bit of a saying.
But I think with little effort, they would understand the basic ideas
and they would know whether in a way that was or wasn't a sort of department,
if they were truly artists.
But people often dismiss it entirely.
Well, they're still, they know their putuginers,
but they don't know that there's putuginers.
They cannot know what's right, what's wrong.
I met quite a lot of monks there, senior monks there,
who would know, who would openly say, oh, I haven't had anything.
But they wouldn't stop them from saying what you should do in terms of practice,
which is a contradiction in terms.
If you don't know yourself, what you need to do in terms of the right view,
how can you even conceive teaching somebody else to get the right view?
It's just mind-bubbling contradiction that doesn't seem to stop them.
So then coming from the same place,
if they come across something they don't like,
they don't like the way it was put out, they don't like the way it was taught.
These pleases them or whatever,
such as in the videos books and his views, they'll dismiss it.
Knowing themselves their putuginers and they have no criteria for the true dismissal,
they'll dismiss it, which is why they stay putuginers.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's just how it works.
Yeah.
So as putuginers, you don't know what's right, you don't know what's wrong.
That's why the element of faith is necessary.
But that faith should be like govern or guided or directed by intelligence.
Not just blind faith, but you accept everything called Buddhism,
but you discern and you think what is least likely to be wrong.
I don't know what's right.
Everything might be wrong.
What is least likely to be wrong,
and then I'll start putting my effort in that.
And then if I was a little bit fortunate,
if I was intelligent enough, I might have chosen the right thing,
and with a sufficient amount of effort I could,
I'll get a confirmation that it's right thing,
which is one of the sutras the Buddha would refer to,
sort of one as somebody who has a confirmed confidence in them.
Like they were confident, this is least likely the correct thing,
and then they had that thought confirmed when they became sort of one.
So they know, they they know.
If sort of one, if you become sort of one,
everything or faith and everything to the...
Well, the faith gets replaced by confidence.
It all becomes unshakable faith,
which is not really faith anymore, it's confidence.
He knows that he knows.
And he cannot even conceive,
because the Buddha is the Dhamma.
Dhamma is the Buddha.
So it's not...
It's not that the Buddha is the person,
or something who happened to say something right.
No, the Buddha is that teaching.
So they understood the teaching, they understood the Buddha.
So that's what it's inconceivable for them to now follow a different teacher.
And when I say a different teacher,
I don't mean another monk who might be teaching the same,
and then they have, okay, I'll listen to you a bit more,
because you seem like they did follow Sariputta.
No, when I say a different teacher, I mean Christian.
Teaching Christian philosophy, Christian views,
or Western science for that matter,
because that's almost like religion today, or psychology.
They wouldn't be able to adopt that,
because it's a wrong view.
The only way they could adopt any other teaching,
if it's the teaching that's the same as the Dhamma,
it would be the Dhamma.
It's actually interesting.
Some Christians, they can become Arya, you know?
Not through Christianity, you know?
Not through Christianity.
I've had a venerable man told me that in the Buddha was Arya,
what time they were sold upon there was something,
and in this life they were born as Christian or something,
at least in Christian family.
Then something, anyway.
No, that makes no difference.
What view your family holds,
and what had it that you're born in, that's irrelevant.
No, what view you hold,
and what teaching you follow personally to try to understand,
that's what matters.
So somebody can my world be a Christian priest,
if he ponders on impermanence,
and suffering, and nature or not self,
he ponders on Dhamma.
And if he becomes an Arya,
he becomes because of the Dhamma,
not because of his belief in imaginary friend.
If they become Arya with being the Christian,
all of those believe that they go...
Well, they would see them as wrong.
Wrong.
Well, not even.
Like, they would see them as irrelevant.
Like, the belief in God and everything,
not as much as it's wrong,
but it's just irrelevant.
It makes no difference.
Obviously, it makes a difference for people who don't know
and put their whole life in those beliefs.
Beliefs.
But if somebody understood the nature of suffering
and freedom from it,
belief, it just doesn't even apply belief in God anymore.
I have this country with many people,
they believe in astrology and horoscope and everything.
What's the problem?
Well, it's a superstition.
It's the most kind of primal attitude towards, you know,
the unknown.
People are superstitious,
magic and all kinds of good signs and bad signs.
It's basically like something people need to do
in order to quickly escape anxiety,
anxiety of an existing individual.
Because, you know, just being alive already means
you're in a parallel situation
because you can die at any time
and you're absolutely no sane in it.
And just that single thought
can freak people out,
can make them mad.
If they really are who.
Like, you just, you couldn't stop it.
Your whole world can end in a second
and you can't do anything about it.
So the immediate response to that
is,
nobody will all be good, I believe.
God will protect me,
or Universal Energy will protect me,
or my horoscope tell me I'll be fortunate.
Anything like that, just to give you
the little grain of hope to overcome it
and allows you enough to not look at the anxiety.
Because if you keep looking,
you'll go mad.
And the Buddha did say that.
He said that if somebody experienced suffering
rightly,
correctly, that anxiety
opened clear without any cover
of the views and superstition
and all sorts of other religions,
there are only two outcomes.
Mental derangement,
or search.
A noble search
they will bring that pain
and if somebody is strong enough to not go mad,
it would result in them looking for a medicine
that can remove this pain.
So that's the state the person needs to be in.
It needs to be open to the extension
anxiety to such an extent
that there is a risk of madness,
but that means there is also
a possibility of the right search.
Doesn't mean the person actually has to go mad.
But that means the person has to stop
covering it up through superstition,
through horoscope,
through empty beliefs,
through magic,
and so on.
Mental weakness.
Mental weakness.
Which one?
The astrology.
Good.
Good.
When he...
When he got...
Oh yeah, the suspicious signs.
Well, he didn't refuse it completely
in terms of...
The divine interventions.
So, let's say,
can't say the truth.
What do they say?
It comes through.
Sometimes.
Sometimes.
But it's always 50-50, isn't it?
So, it means five out of ten
can always get it right.
Because I say this will happen,
or that will happen.
Well, one of the thought comes,
will happen.
So, I have 50% of chance
of being right.
The Buddha never dismissed that,
but he never,
ever used it as a...
Like, in reference to the pertain
to the court of the teaching
and feelings of a censor
or whatever else.
So, that also...
Like, back to the question,
well, how did he use it then?
In what sense?
Whether it was like a real divine.
Like, there are people who could,
even back in the day,
who could develop like supernatural abilities,
and they could see a future destination
based on the current actions you're doing.
And then,
there are people who can see
or two or three next destinations
based on the current actions you're doing.
There are people who can see ten.
So, yeah.
And then, if they say,
well, this is your...
like...
future projection,
then that's true.
But again, it's not set in stone.
Because if you change your behavior,
you can change your future outcome.
Like, with the current set of mental...
determinations and things you do,
and whether actions are wholesome and unwholesome,
you are heading to heaven.
But if that changes,
if you start misbehaving with doing some unwholesome stuff,
you won't be going to heaven.
And that's what the Buddha said.
Sometimes people see only one life ahead.
And then they say,
and then they see somebody here,
misbehaving.
But they see his next life is heaven.
Then they see somebody behaving,
but they see his next life is also heaven.
And then they say,
oh, makes no difference whether you behave,
or you misbehaved,
you're reborn in heaven.
But then another person comes and says,
five lives are ahead.
And then he says,
well, yeah, he might be in the heaven next life.
Because actually in the previous life,
he did some good stuff.
But next four lives are misery.
The one who behaves,
all five will be heaven.
And then he says,
no, it matters how you behave,
whether good or bad.
So even those views are limited,
but they all pertain to the extent of,
like, nature of samsara,
what might be ahead of you,
and so on,
not to the way to escape it.
Which is what the Buddha was concerned about.
Because if you're an Arant,
that's it.
No matter.
And I think he was slightly mocking them,
but he was also proving a point.
There was that divine,
he would do this divine divination.
He would look at the skull.
They would give him a skull for that person.
And he would tap on it,
and do some things.
And they say,
he is reborn in such and such place.
And I think there must have been something,
he might have had some of the abilities
to see in the future,
which doesn't mean nothing.
But Ujjana can see future reverts.
It's no salvation.
It's just,
if I tell you tomorrow,
you're most likely be home.
In 10 years,
you might be next life,
you might be some,
like, at such and such place.
It's within the same nature of things.
Like, if I tell you,
in five minutes,
you'll do this,
and in, you know,
five hundred lifetimes,
you'll do that.
It's a greater on a scale,
but it's the same thing.
So when they brought this skull
to this man of a monk,
who died, who was an Arant,
he tapped it,
and then he was confused,
and then he kept tapping it,
and he couldn't,
he couldn't see anything.
And it's like,
well, that's because he's not reborn anyway.
Because that's exactly what I'm talking about.
Yes, I really do.
Well, yeah, the thing is,
but the problem is,
people don't take you to like that.
They take it as a,
as a setting stone divine,
like, completely blessed.
Oh, I'm blessed because I was told,
no,
at the time when you were told,
if that person who told you,
could truly see it,
you were having it at the heaven,
the destination.
That's because,
back then,
your behavior was good.
But they don't tell you that.
They just tell you,
you go to heaven,
and that's it.
I spent my rest of my life thinking,
I go to heaven,
no matter what I do.
And that's exactly what Christians,
what they've been doing,
you know, the crusade,
the wars and stuff.
You go plundering,
raping, murdering, stealing,
stealing with the belief
of you going to heaven,
because you were told.
But actually,
even that depends on you right now,
actions.
So you might,
you will be better off if somebody tells you,
if you behave wholesomely,
if you don't give in to anger,
don't give it to greed,
don't give it to any aversion,
you're most likely going to heaven.
And you don't need any special,
natural powers to know that,
you just need a simple intelligent reflection
which I started this talk with,
when somebody thinks,
well, whether I miss behave or not,
if there is a future life or not,
it's better to behave.
You're better off if somebody tells you that,
because then,
for the rest of your life,
you'll be doing things rightly
with that thought of a good river
and the Buddha did say that, actually.
He said,
behaving properly,
keeping the seal and virtues
goes to more fortunate destinations.
That's better to be told,
then if somebody just tells you,
oh, yes, you're heading to heaven
and you take it for granted.
And if they truly knew that you were heading to heaven,
they probably wouldn't just tell you,
you're heading to heaven.
You will tell you,
you're heading to heaven,
if you keep behaving properly like you're doing now.
But unless you hear that,
then be a bit more doubtful,
just in case.
Again, even if they're right or not,
you can't tell,
so it's better to be on the same side.
So that's how the Buddha approached you.
It doesn't mean there's absolutely nothing to it,
but whatever it is,
it still depends on what you do right here right now.
So it doesn't really mean much.
