There's loads of questions anyway, but I'll start with this Anapanasan Suta, 118, when it says
the fulfillment of the four foundations of mindfulness, when you do breathing, it says
you're on that occasion, the big fibides contemplating the body as a body, I didn't fully
aware of my thought, having put away covetousness and grief for the world. I said that this is
a certain body among the bodies, namely in our breathing. So I say that is a certain
body among the bodies. Yeah there's quite a quite a bit of a debate over that translation.
I don't know if I'm a big body and then I think the other one I thought he was referring
to it as a body in and out breath and another say well no it refers to the whole body, so
the whole body breathing, so it was never clear just looking at the body, but in terms of
the practice of the mindfulness of breathing, I think maybe I didn't, but I think I mentioned
that in the notation, maybe you don't get that, you didn't have that part. Well the mindfulness,
yeah the mindfulness of the in and out breath in and out breathing is inseparable from the body,
it is bodily, it's bound with the body, so one doesn't occur with the other, you cannot possibly
conceive in and out breath of breathing without conceiving the body, and same body means breathing.
When you're mindful of in and out breath then that which is the body there at that time
is one among the ways of experiencing the body. Body among all the possibilities you can
experience your body, familiar out familiar, far near, heavier lights, whatever, this is one of them.
Well the body of, the way the body is experienced while breathing, while being mindful of breathing,
not just like while breathing.
I don't have time to refine my vision of the body.
Well yeah that's because you're expecting to find something hidden there, so you need to like
sharpen your binoculars to really see the details. That is true only to a certain extent,
it doesn't really work like that. Like sharpening the image means like clearing the vision,
as you say it means just finding more details about it, but you can find as many details as you like,
if you have no sight of the nature of that thing, which is on a general level, no details will help you.
So again, what do you expect, what do you hope, what do you crave for, you find,
when you look at the body, when you want to look at it even closer, why, why, what's that?
I don't know what I expect, if I say yeah, I want it okay, I'm going to look mindful of the body now. Why?
Why?
Well to become dispassionate towards it. Why?
Why? To be passionate towards it. No, why? Why? Why is that a goal?
Why is dispassion good?
Wow, is that obvious? No, say it, it's obvious, say it. Well it would be to be free from that passion
or what, depression, covetousness and grief of the world. So what are those covetousness, grief in
the world and everything having common? No suffering, suffering here. So the whole point is to be
free from suffering, but if you're attempts to look at the body closer and closer and closer,
are frustrating when making your suffer, then you are contradicting the whole purpose.
So yes, we agree, mindfulness of the body will bring freedom from suffering, but you have to find
out how, not just do it blindly. And yes, we agree, not being mindful and not keeping the
preset who certainly result in pain and suffering, and just obvious. But when it comes to,
because you are doing the suffering, the suffering is not hidden behind some,
some distant, I don't know, stones that you have to all turn up and look underneath and find
what's there. You are doing it. So once you place yourself in certain amount of
containment through precincts and kind of okay, our practice and making the effort,
well now within that you actually have to sometimes turn around and look at what you're doing
within that, not just keep going and looking out to find the cause of the suffering,
because craving is done, you're responsible for it, and craving is the absolutely only direct,
well it's the direct and absolutely only cause for duka. Craving means presence of duka,
absence of craving is absence of duka, simultaneously, no time lapse in between,
it's simultaneously rising, simultaneously ceasing. So whenever there is suffering in regard to
absolutely anything, even if it's your meditation, means craving is there. So initially,
certain amount of suffering is inevitable. When you put that container, the craving is still there,
so you will suffer. But if you just keep taking that for granted, you'll never recognize the
phone over truth. So after a while within that container, you have to start saying okay,
this is nothing, I'm not doing anything on the whole soon, so why am I still suffering within that?
When you recognize that the craving is that dark, the direct clean is generating suffering,
you stop doing it, and then you'll know how to meditate and everything else. And by the way,
Anapanasad is taught to at least so to punish. So as many as you shouldn't be trying it,
because through trying that, you can come to understand these things I'm talking about, but
you have to know that what is the, well you have to keep a goal in mind, because it's so easy
to become, when it comes to meditation, everything, and obviously, because all of the
contemporary interpretations and techniques and stages and attachments or whatever else they talk
about, you kind of are always led to expect something, even you can sit, you expect something,
I expect peace from meditation, I expect this, I expect that. And expecting something,
it's like waiting for something, doing it in order for something to arise, and that's exactly
the type of wrong meditation that would have condemned. In that sort of way, he said, you're like
among primeditists or meditists, under meditists, mismetitists, just as a aina,
like waiting in front of a rabbit hole or as a stalk, like waiting for the fish, just waiting,
waiting, like focusing just on one point, looking for other animals of prey, in the same sense,
among sits and like waiting for something to happen to his mind. And that's, that's basically
meditation today, that's what it's called as meditation, all of this arises, and even if it's not
explicitly defined, you will inevitably imply that that expectation, that expectation will be
implied in whatever meditation you do, or whatever meditation technique, whatever. One thing they all
have in common is none of them will teach you in the standing, because there isn't any,
the teacher technique, you'll teach a type of prime, prime, prime, no,
prime, type of praying upon something. Yeah, you pray upon something.
So that's what it comes down to, yeah, whether it's this we pass on that, you're just praying
upon time, then you have this old woman feelings or whatever, oh yeah, you've got it in the
rows or whatever, but that's all just like, you know, you tickle your foot, it will start to
itch. You do this if you result in that, it's absolutely means nothing in terms of understanding,
it's irrelevant. But once you have the understanding, even if you do meditation, you'll be doing
it rightly, whichever meditation you do, because you'll be doing it through the right view,
I, in from the perspective of craving, and not craving, and I'll generate more craving,
and I'll be dependent upon craving expectations. In other words, you'll be standing yourself in
further, in the path of non-suffering that you ordered and disturbed. Because you know that it's
suffering. Because you know how suffering rises, you know how suffering ceases, so whatever you do,
you'll be doing it for a cessation that's suffering. Because when I was saved by a focus on
that birth elements and seeing the earth element, just, it's just the earth element. There's nothing
more that can be expected from it. It's quite, you know, in my experience, like, I say, I
established mine in there. It's not, I feel like, this is just the earth element and establishing mine
in that place. There's nothing more that I can expect. One thing that you can't develop then,
but that thing does not, it's not, cannot be done through craving. So yeah, there won't be
an expectation. There won't be any craving when you establish your mine in there, or never. But what
you can do then is keep developing, practicing mindfulness in regard to the established mine upon
earth. You know what? I mean, like, hold it in your mind for as long as you can as they do in
those repassionate centers or whatever else. But be aware of its persisting or changing of the
reason thing, which is establishment upon earth. Oh, yeah, there's nothing to expect here. The
thing is still present. And it's still present. And it's still present. And it's still present.
Not equally present. Other things start arising, but don't lose the sight of that establishment
which starts to act as a reference point. It's there while other things are arising. So then
you're really experiencing things through that foundation, foundation of mindfulness, which is
why they're called foundations or references or whatever else you translate it. And then you will
see that whatever that thing upon which you establish will eventually come to fade. And then you
are aware that you know you see arising and ceasing. It's arising and its cessation. As I said
before, arising is like ascension. Sessation is like descent. So it's through arising,
persisting or changing is manifestant. Through ceasing, persisting or changing is manifestant.
That's why three characteristics. But they're not linear characteristics as they are translated
or usually written down. So it's arising while persisting while persisting and changing.
And it's ceasing while persisting and changing. Fading in, fading out. The identity of the same thing
remains. But in a way it's not the same thing because it's intensity varies, varies, changes.
And then another thing has a reason. But the thing is with the establishment upon such a general
phenomenon such as earth or any other casino, you can just maintain that mindfulness throughout
in regard to anything because anything that arises on the particular earth has the element of earth
in it. And the sublime, the most supreme of them all, consider consciousness. Imagine that. Anything
that arises implies presence. Anything, no matter how subtle, how quick, how slow, you establish
upon the phenomenon of presence of anything. You mindfulness cannot lapse because it's actually
maintained through the particular arising of various irrelevant things. Is that establishing
a mind on infinite consciousness without being the same thing? Because then it does seem
but easy, easier. Because if you establish a mind of presence. Oh yeah, well yeah, well, I don't
mean presence in a tree hugging, new age. I mean presence, phenomenological presence.
It's a present of a thing. Whatever it's in front of you, I think that it is present.
So within that, it's in front of you. You can be even more mindful and more established
upon something more general. So you can get yourself upon the earth. So the element of earth
is present through other things. It's quite supreme in regard to everything. But then there is more
supreme in regard to the element of earth. And fun, unoptimately, it's the consciousness.
It's the most supreme, the most refined thing. But you don't have to go that far. Because it's
that reference point that matters. Because that's what gets to me in a way. As well, I suppose
it's my craving, because I try to establish my own earth and then there's also water.
And there's also fire. How about some air? How about some diversity?
Well, that's the thing when that starts happening. It means you are not really established
upon the element of earth because you lost it so quickly. But if you were established,
if your mindfulness was setting it, then when those other cravings start coming up,
you see them through this reference point, which you won't lose.
And then if you start feeling, oh, what if I start losing this reference point,
you see that through the reference point of earth. Because it is within that already.
And that's how understanding comes. Through practicing that while, remember I was
emphasis in that before. That's a practice of mindfulness. While two things simultaneously present,
you become aware of that principle. So if you do that long enough, you realize that
the understanding will come. Even if you don't go around experiencing every individual thing that
can arise while you're established upon the element of earth, you do that to a certain extent.
But after a while, it becomes apparent. You understand, you see through it, and you realize that
whatever has a reason, whatever will arise, whatever is rising now, will remain
inferior to the element of earth upon which I'm established. So that's how that understanding
kind of compensates, deals with it, fills up whatever else experience you were lacking in terms of
in terms of insight. But sometimes you need to go through these motions more before the
understanding occurs. But full, full, eventually it should occur. And when it does, then you will
stop chasing particular things and stop being concerned about them. Because you understood,
whatever comes in, whatever goes out has to come to you at this point.
And that's what matters. It doesn't matter if the particular thing never matters.
It was that relationship that you were not aware of. It hasn't been understood,
which was inducing all sorts of emotions and cravings and feelings and confusions and five
engines. Yeah, I'll experience breathing, experiencing rapture. I say that this is a certain feeling
among feelings, namely giving close attention to giving it out of breathing, a certain feeling amongst
feelings. Well, given close attention, I'm like we have to really look into a pile in there.
See the translation, but anyway, I can still answer it. The whole point, the whole point, say,
say you understood the craving, you saw the phone over the truth. So you are at least a
soda partner. You practice mindfulness of breathing. So breathing is bodily.
It's intentional act that belongs to the body. So with the lack, with the lack of mindfulness
and with the lack of knowledge, that bodily act is appropriated, either through I am reading
forcefully or voluntarily or through complete ignorance of that breathing whereby you think
it's completely automatic. So you obscure the fact that it is intentional.
But if you don't do either, you can actually come to see that breathing is an intentional act
being done right here that doesn't belong to you. And there isn't anything more you can ask for
in terms of meditation, object in the letter comments. You have an act being done right here,
right now, intentional act, not involuntary like a heartbeat or something like that.
Yet it doesn't belong to you, it belongs to the body. You become established in that, then
that body there will be one among the bodies which you are experiencing. But it will be the body that
matters, it will be the body that is not yours. That feeling there, looking at that type of
intentional breathing that doesn't belong to you, that feeling you have there at that time in
regard to that will be one among feelings that you can experience, but it will be the one that
matters because it will be feeling that it is not yours. That intention there and goes
same for what we have against. So that's why it will have to be done properly with the right
view, it will have to culminate in the full development of the enlightenment factors, the four
powers and then the enlightenment factors. Because it will just reveal the whole thing as it is.
But it has to come through that, that's why you said I am breathing in like this,
like as if you're doing it, you start doing it just to become a parent it, yes you are doing it
and that whole thing is not yours, it's bodily. So everything remains the same so to speak,
just the emphasis of I am breathing, bodily intention shifts onto the body. So I am breathing
bodily intention, but now it's resting on the body. So even that I am breathing ceases to be yours,
ceases to be mine, ceases to be me. And then you become really established, then you come
breathing in like this, I am breathing in like that, I will be breathing in like this, I will be
breathing like that, I will be feeling this, I will be feeling that I will be doing this, I will be
doing whatever you like because none of it belongs to you. And by practicing it like that,
you're just kind of reinforcing that recognition, that it's not yours, because it's just
inferior to the whole body. Well yeah, none of it would be there if that body is not there,
if that body is not intentional to begin with, if there is no intentionality belonging to the body
in regard to the body, none of this will be visible, but it's just that you appropriate intentionality
because that's mental belongs to the mind and the Buddha said it's much harder, well it's easier
to see body as not yours and get this passion in regards to it and so on in regard to it,
but it's much harder to feel the same towards your mind because it's half-ler, faster, harder to
recognize and so on, but mind is inconceivable without the body, there is no consciousness
just opposed to over the body, if it's not paired with it, there wouldn't be number up or
the other number up, it just wouldn't exist. So that's why this whole, the elements in body contemplation,
just to reveal the subordinate position of the greatest of your thoughts and mind and
yeah, the mind comes first in terms of determining things, but the order of form being first structurally
cannot ever change, so as an act, for an action, the mind determines it, but structurally speaking,
it's all dependent upon this conscious body, matter that is paired with consciousness out there,
conscious matter,
is now when you think consciousness you kind of imply it inside of this end of this spectrum
and the matter is out there in the world, actually both consciousness and the matter around
there in the world, your consciousness is there with your think, that's why you can even,
well that's where you can perceive distances and space, but oh that's why you can think
in terms of space and in terms of distances, because consciousness is already there and it goes
into infinity, that's where you can perceive into infinity, if you're able to reach it.
The idea, just the thought of space will be inconceivable, if consciousness is generally inside of you
or in your head, as opposed to the matter out there, it will be just a perfect linear
flat, but it's not, is it one, would you say that it's one presence,
no, it's many different, as many forms as many consciousness, that's the thing,
if it's one then it's mine, if there's six, which one's yours then, and there are six,
each domain of the senses has its own consciousness, does each particular, within that you have each
particular consciousness within the same nature of consciousness, that's all those divisions like
618, 108 of feelings of this, that's how it goes, it's not linear, it's not like commenter is
trying to list them all up, yeah, so yes there is, as an aggregate, as a nature of consciousness,
there is consciousness, but in terms of experience there's six domains of your senses,
that's six consciousness, six different consciousness, just recognizing that can be enough for
this passion and abandon the right view, because if there's six simultaneously present the conscious
domains, well none of them, well certainly not all of them can be mine, and if there is no
feeling of singularity, like one, me, there is no feeling of self, and master it, because if there's
six, well which one is it then, oh is this one, yeah, but now is the other one, so
the one that you thought it was yours couldn't be yours, because now the other one is in its place,
so there's six, and then within each of those domains of consciousness you have infinite,
infinite structure, infinite, infinite direction, you can call it like that,
so when you look at the tree in the distance there, your consciousness is right there,
at that distance, I don't mean like your consciousness is there as if you're here now,
so if you walk there you'll see your consciousness, no, from your orientation right here,
yeah, that distance there, the consciousness is out there, and the extended distance goes,
the extent of the consciousness is just gone, because otherwise you wouldn't even perceive that,
you wouldn't even perceive the color or the difference of everything if it's not manifested there
as it is in the distance, even if that distance that's just perceived by itself, it's already conscious,
consciousness is there, distance is conscious, matter is conscious, you just find it all there,
yeah, and that's the only reason you can actually appropriate it, and that's the only reason
why the other hand should be possible, because if you were not finding it there and appropriating it,
you couldn't free yourself from it, in other words if you were really creating consciousness
and controlling it and directing it, that's it,
really ready, well there is no gap for any movement, it's all sealed, closed, done,
and you're stuck, a point being no, there is a mistake going on, which is you don't see that
you already find things already there, you don't see that, that's why you misconceive them,
as mine, as my creation, as I'm the master, as myself, and what do you find already there,
whatever has the nature of manifesting, even a fleet in thought,
the fact that it has appeared, the fact that you did not, the fact that you just
have it appeared to you, means it came on its own, the other way it's open on its own,
same feeling, intention, anything, the fact that it appears, means it did not come from you,
you just met it, meeting of the three is content,
so you just met it ignorantly and you assumed you were contacted, it is my aimless,
but if you meet it with that understanding, that is, well yeah, then you're not contacted,
so whatever, whatever manifests, it's already there, given by itself on its own,
you just find it there, which is nothing else than saying, whatever has the nature of arising,
has the nature of ceasing, in other words, whatever is manifested, has the nature of manifestation,
is in its nature independent of me, and if something is independent of you means it comes and goes,
and you cannot do anything about it, and if something is independent of you, means it is not yours,
doesn't obey you, doesn't listen to you, but you don't, you see that part, default,
I'm seeing that it's, yeah all of these, yeah, limitation of talking about it, it's just one insight,
yeah I see, I do not say that there is, that there is the development of mindfulness,
I'm breathing for one who is forgetful, but when you contemplate, I shall breathe in contemplating
impermanence, contemplating within which fading away cessation, on that occasion it
bicker by contemplating mind objects as mind objects, having put away covetousness and grief for
the world, having seen with wisdom the abandonment of covetousness and grief, he closely looks on with
anonymity, that is the occasion of bicker by contemplating mind, yeah that having seen with wisdom
the abandonment, he knows he sees it, it knows, and then the result is in difference,
yeah, and he applies to it, establishing your mind on indifference, if you get okay,
yeah that's interesting, yeah, well see the thing is your mind needs to be quite strong already,
you know the established, yeah because those are more refined phenomena,
like stone or something like that, or body or material things, it's easy to relate to,
so that's how most people inevitably will have to start, but yeah if your mind gets established
upon the thought, well you can get established to such a phenomena, so general, so ambiguous,
when you look at it from a daily kind of worldly point of view, just say infinite consciousness,
but that is a real phenomena, it is real as such, so if you see at the extent that it's present,
which is very subtle, and you get established upon it, well you'll be quite skilled in mind
establishments, in genres and everything else, or even further neither perception or no perception,
yeah, and ultimately cessation of perception and feeling, you get established in that state,
but see now when you think about it, infinite consciousness, that thought is in a way that
which infinite consciousness is, because all you have is your own experience, obviously your mind
is not trained in regard to that phenomenon, but if you keep dwelling on it long enough,
accurately, mindfully, it will become more and more accurate in terms of when you think infinite
consciousness, it will more and more start to stand for that which infinite consciousness really is,
so as I said before, no matter how abstract thought is, it's abstract only in relation to its
content, in itself it is very real, because usually abstract means you dismiss it,
because it's not real, but the nature of abstraction is very real,
you have the word in the book, you think, yeah, so there is already some significant, the fact
that you can designate it, even as an ambiguous abstract term, means there is some significance good,
means, well, it is experienced in such way,
so you might think infinite consciousness in relation to this present body right here on this chair,
and in a way you can become established upon that, then after a while,
you will become apparent that what you established is your thought of what infinite consciousness is
in regard to this body there, and that's also fine, it's not a mistake, it's just that now,
you can see well actually, if infinite consciousness is what the sutra say infinite consciousness is,
then there is infinite consciousness in regard to my thought too, now just in regard to the body there,
so you have infinite consciousness in regard to your thought of what infinite consciousness is,
and that is really such, but see it's much subtler now already,
but nevertheless, if your mind gets skilled in phenomena, then dama,
you just start seeing these things from what they are, to the extended appear, you see them to
the extended appear, you want to be overcompensating through ignorance, or you won't be ignoring them through
ignorance, you will see them for what they are, to the extent that they have a reason,
so if the general thing you see is general things, but if you see the particular thing,
you won't be making general into particular particular into general how do you confuse it,
and overattending or underattending or misattending or whatever else,
the only somanasikara means that, means having attention that doesn't really
that sees the way it has a reason, at its root, at its origin,
and it's about a super putting with seeing things,
yeah that's another stem see, a super, like now you can say a super, it can be an abstract term,
but again, the fact that you were able to designate it even in such vague terms, it is real as such,
so then you start dwelling on it, and if you dwell on it you might start seeing more of it,
and then you might understand the nature, the point being that's why again we spoke earlier,
learning comes first, you need to learn, you need to know what you're supposed to look for, what, how to
look for, because otherwise you can't, things won't show themselves, show you the truth by themselves,
and you didn't, wouldn't need the Buddha, any spiritual teaching would do, because that's all they say,
so you need to know what to look for, so once you find out what to look for, you start looking for,
so in terms of a super you need to know to look for the aspect of ugly or non-beautiful, in everything,
why, because it is there, beauty is sort of, it's relevant, sorry it's relative, in the same sense
that ugliness is relative, it's ugly only relation to something that is less ugly,
but see, now because we get so dependent and attached and infatuated by beauty,
you think in terms of beauty, so if it's something ugly, you know, you really, you might say ugly,
but for you it really means it's less beautiful, oh it's really not beautiful, but beautiful is
the reference you think through, and for as long as you think through the reference you're
maintaining your central dependence, but view of centrality really, craving for centrality,
emotional beauty, yeah, you see it brings to beauty, yeah, so even if you're not seeing any
beautiful objects, you still see them through the beauty if you're unestablished, so they'll
just see in this less beautiful, so what you need to do is reverse that because it's possible,
because again you can attend it either way, there is absolutely no reason to attend it is beautiful,
no more justified reason, the only reason is your ignorance, so you start overriding that,
you start overriding your ignorance, because there is the aspect of repulsive in everything,
and what is that aspect, it's the very fact that those things are completely indifferent towards
you, independent of you, and that's quite, well especially if you're infatuated, that is quite
not nice, cold, but then you change that, and you start looking at everything like that,
and then things that seemingly give care for you, you can just see them as, oh slightly less
independent, but still see them through that ugly aspect, so the infatuation, the criteria of
beauty, this is to be the motivator for your action, because everything can be attended beautifully,
or non-beautiful, out of habit, you attend everything beautiful, even ugly things,
so that's what it means, you become really skilled in seeing through that dependence,
which is what it's meant in those situations, because it says he sees a beautiful, ugly,
ugly is beautiful, beautiful is beautiful, ugly is ugly, he can do any either way, his mind is
developed, yes ugly, so if you're seeing things as ugly, like even beautiful would be just less
ugly, still ugly, shit, you're a really bad smelling shit, and slightly less smelling shit,
but it's still equally a shit, like you wouldn't go and grab a shit because it smells less,
it's still a shit, vice versa, if you keep seeing it as beautiful, you will go to a very ugly thing
out of despair, and just recognize it as a beautiful attractive aspect and go for it,
you know when there are no beautiful women around, well you take what you can get,
so the standards drop, if you're in prison, you go after men with resembles women,
or not even that, again all through seeing things, like not being able to break free from
dependence, craving for beauty, but when you reckon it's beautiful and start seeing it as ugly,
you will eventually, you won't happen overnight, because it's, you know,
deeply rooted habit, essentially, but it will fade out because you're not maintaining it,
it needs maintenance, so if instead of beautiful and less beautiful, you start seeing
it less ugly and ugly, you will get dispassionate, as well as the looking at pictures or something.
Well it gives you initials per, but if you don't recognize what the actual purpose and the point
of the whole thing is, you can be based in your walls with the super images, it's not going to
do anything, well after a while you're probably still getting attracted to, oh well yeah,
it might be mutilated corpse, but look at the breast on it, yeah, yeah, you need to see the ugly.
If you establish your mind upon the ugly, however, you can have the most gorgeous naked woman
right in front of you inviting you, and you will generally not want to, you will be repelled by it,
why? Because it is generally repelling,
it's actually ugly is more fundamental, more structurally, more primordial than beautiful,
beautiful requires attraction, and then you start seeing ugly is beautiful, you get infiltrated,
ugly doesn't require anything, doesn't require passion to work, which is again why sensuality is
possible to bring fever. You, beauty requires attraction, requires
attraction, there's even a, I do not delight even, or even a little bit of being,
like I do not delight in the due to the feces, yeah, yeah, why? Because even like a fingernail
amount of shit, it's still shit, smells like shit, looks like shit, feels tasty, tastes like shit as well,
but everything, everything, everything that exists,
all these independence, everything that manifests, why?
For the reason that it has manifested itself, so basically the, how to put it,
the way out, like the key to freedom, is in the fact that you're being imprisoned,
it's right there, the fact that you're imprisoned means you can be free,
so the fact that things arise, and you take them as my, and they imprison you, they'll wake you,
means that they're not yours to begin with, which means, yeah, you can escape,
exactly, from their imprisonment, so the proof in things and permanence is in its manifesting
permanence, because that permanence is manifested itself by itself on its own,
you're nothing to do with it, means, oh, this is impermanence,
for that very reason it will, for the reason that it has manifested itself,
for that very reason it will have to cease, nothing else, so its manifestation is its end,
and shows that end is implicit, there's nothing to do with it,
that someone could fall, has to go further as well, maybe to think, like I said,
I'm free from this, no, I'm free from prison,
to notice that freedom, so, yeah, well, people can reduce that, they can get a claim,
so they can read something, oh, we're already free or something, but then you have to be self-transparent,
so you can say, oh, yes, unfree, but then, okay, well, can the suffering still arise?
So you just, you just bring in another question in criteria, and put two and two together,
because according to this teaching, that show me the glimpse of this impermanence,
being free means free from suffering, so now I know honestly, if I ask myself,
can the suffering arise for me, in any form, any shape whatsoever, in the future or whatever,
can it, can it do so, if you see, yes, I'm not really free,
but not free to the, to the sufficient extent, to say, I'm free,
am I worried about something? Exactly, so, oh, so even if you say, yeah, but still you're free,
well, okay, what's the point of this freedom, if I'm not free from suffering, because that's a
whole point of freedom, being free from pain, being free from, prospect of pain, yeah,
well, here now, in regard to the future or whatever, so, as I said, remember when I told you that,
when I read that, now I can't remember saying, oh, well, you're already the all-sot upon us, when I was
learning that I did so, actually, wow, so I'm already sot upon it, but then at the same time, I thought,
well, okay, even if that is true, what difference does it make? If my amount of suffering has
not changed, or my amount of being liable to suffering has not changed, what's the point,
even if I call myself another, there's no point, unless obviously I practice it for the wrong reasons,
but if you practice it generally for the freedom from suffering, then becomes the only measure
only criteria you care about, and only criteria you should be care about, because that's what the
Buddha said himself, only two things, suffering and freedom from it, that's the sole purpose, sole
pastes, absolutely the only thing that the teachings consider about, nothing else, suffering and freedom
from it, so you can think, oh, see, I'm already free, okay, great, how did that affect my suffering,
my liability to suffering? Well, it feels like it might have felt, okay, what, keep doing it then,
it makes no difference whatsoever, keep doing it then,
yeah, there you go, yeah, you said the whole point,
first of all, the pleasure that comes from janas and being secluded from it, it's not something you
can crave for, you can't really conceive it as a feeling, because, no, because the feeling now
implies, well, because the only pleasure you're familiar with, is pleasure of centrality,
but if you withdraw yourself from it sufficiently, then you can discover a different type of pleasure,
that it's completely free from underlying tendencies, and that's pleasure of janas,
pleasure of seclusion, pleasure of freedom,
because through a soup, you can be noted, you see the obvious, reaches this passion,
reaches the security from passion, and then feels pleasant on account of that,
but that's basically a janas, yeah, yeah, that's what I'm telling you about in janas,
like janas, it's nothing, well, first of all, you see that in Anapanasalti, it's not mentioned
at all, leads to forefootation and mindfulness, leads to forepowers, leads to self-factors
and enlightenment, leads to our nature, no mention of janas, why? because janas are completely
different things, it's not like direction, particularly directly, it's a particular way of establishing
yourself as a result of this passion, so whether you reach that this passion through Anapanasalti,
you can establish yourself in janas, sure enough, just to say that, whether you reach that
this passion through looking at a suba, you can establish yourself in janas, whether you reach
that this passion through thinking about what jana is, you can establish yourself in jana,
but this whole nonsense, that all came with this premediting, overmediting, mismediting,
where you expect your crave for things like a hyena looking for a prey, waiting in front of a
rabbit hole, and then you have the transcendental feelings and noble play bodily experiences,
and then now I'm going to second jana, third jana, oh yeah, I've seen, I'm going back to first one,
say nothing to do with it, absolutely nothing to do with it, I mean it states quite secure from
central pleasures, he updresses, he abides, he abides, he enters and abides in that state,
the people are in the bind, no, then the Buddha said whether you'll be walking in that state or
talking in that state or sitting in that state or doing it, and he's mind remains established.
Yeah, he's saying the article in the mindfulness of the body suit, it says,
he went, when mindfulness is so full, whatever way the water jug, we have a tip, so
it goes, yeah, you just have to direct his mind to jana or whatever, whatever, once, you just
have to fill it up, he will go somewhere, and that's how he also people develop supernatural powers
in the suit, they don't develop them by kind of doing some special practice, they develop mindfulness
and then it says, if there was an opening, he recognized his previous life, if there's an opening,
so if there is another way that this mindfulness can be, this jug full of water can be tipped,
because for some people there is, for some people there is an opening, and there aggregates a
lot of remembrance of more aggregates, some people don't, Sariputta, I was just reading the
earlier, nothing, he said he could not, nothing, he couldn't see, not even just for one person
in the future destination, he couldn't remember anything, none of his future lives, none of his previous
lives, future destination of people, no deeper job, nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing, he couldn't
see even a mere goblin, yet he was absolutely the foremost, the marshal of the Dharma, the
surface calling, after the Buddha, the most supreme, in development, he says nothing to do it,
it's just like circumstantial, some people can remember, some people can't,
like you have blue eyes, somebody has red eyes, as far as the code to you, if you mindfulness
is so full, it will manifest itself, if there is an opening, you don't do anything,
and you see when they kind of acquire the three or four knowledges, previous lives and everything,
they were not doing that, they were committed to the Buddha's instruction, freedom from suffering,
they penetrated the truth, they fully realized, and then the knowledges came,
and then they came, and then that came, as a result of them, fully developed the mindfulness
of the extendacity for the final knowledges,
the signs of, of a sign, don't walk on the grass, is a picture of your absence from that loan,
that's nimita, for that sign, so you just, so yeah, for an untrained mind, those nimitas like wow,
revelation, but that doesn't just thoughts, in relation to the reason things that you face to your
senses, a super nimita would just be, a super nimita would be exactly that, dwelling upon the
thoughts of repulsive in regard to the particular thing, so it's a nimita in regard to it's a sign
and feature of a certain thing, you only, that sort of says, when he establish mindfulness, when
things come through his senses, he doesn't give attention to any signs of features, the word is nimita,
yeah, so initially when you come across the beautiful sign of features, sex,
yeah, it's restrained of the senses, so that's the first nimita that hits you,
but then you get established upon the repulsive, you're going to have different significance
of that experience, you have different nimitas, you have different signs and tokens,
We are experiencing the meters all the time.
Well, the limit is just like intentionality.
Thoughts, that's how you operate.
In many examples, the Buddha goes to see the body.
He looks at different parts of it.
But he goes to whatever is started in the body,
like head, his test, his brain.
All those things, all of this in this particular thing,
is just reinforcing this aspect,
the nature of solidity that is present there.
And then you get established in that.
And then, okay, well, then there are these things that are not solid.
So, less solid is water.
So upon that established aspect,
you establish another aspect.
Upon that aspect, you establish another aspect.
Upon that aspect, you establish another aspect.
So, four elements, so you have everything.
Nothing is not covered.
So it's good, actually.
Well, it's good.
Yeah, for that reason,
if you expect some magical limiters,
it's not going to happen.
If you are doing it for the utter dispassion
in regard to experience as a whole,
and then you get established upon that,
then yeah, and then limiters will happen.
But they won't be mystical kind of manifestations.
They will be like, ah,
now you start recognizing a significance.
So it seemed manifold, this establishment.
Like earth, then everything solid,
everything water, everything this.
It seemed like you're doing it.
But after a while, if you keep doing it,
if you keep practicing it,
that dispassion over things,
that becomes a thing.
No matter how manifold was in your doing an intention,
when it's being experienced,
it's experienced as a thing or a thing.
It has its own limiters.
The two recommenders.
So next time you get those limiters,
you get that experience.
You get experience, you get those limiters.
So you start recognizing signs and tokens
to bring back establishment instantly.
So through the establishment, for example,
wandering on the element of earth,
the element of earth,
the more you are established,
the more implications that phenomena will reveal.
So to speak.
In the same sense, the more you dwell on the beautiful,
the more aspect of beautiful you're going to get.
You want to be grateful.
In the same sense, you dwell on the indifferent,
like a quite sublime aspect of the earth casino,
what you're going to get.
You're going to get its own significance of solid,
of everything.
All of those are limiters in relation to their earth.
And all of those things become new ways,
new tokens, new signs,
to bring back establishment of earth.
In the same sense, now I have to say,
woman, and the aspect of beauty is back,
even if you don't see any particular woman.
Why?
Because you are so familiar in skill
in wandering on those aspects.
But later on, it will not be for you to think,
if you establish yourself on casino earth,
you just think solidity,
and you establish upon the element of earth.
Yes, I'm noticing that.
Even if foam, the foam,
it will be like that.
And it will be the entry point to that same plant.
That's the whole thing.
That's the whole point.
