Go. If you are seeing things in the right way, then something that you know is unskilledful,
say lust comes up, and there is a red flag or you can feel the tendency there or the pressure there,
but you don't, but then the mind goes into that, just investigating it, just naturally like,
okay, now go a red flag, this is unskilledful, why is it unskilledful?
The dominant start falling, why is it unskilled? Because in a classroom, you're not getting wisdom out of this,
it's not peaceful, it's agitated, it's the problem, where is it based on the body,
that body over there, it's not mind, with that view of that situation,
while that situation, it's not like if lust comes up, that is automatically a problem.
No, because you're not free from it, so because you're not free from it, you have to be doing all of which you just described,
because you're not free from the nature of lust, because you're still subject, or you're still liable to lust,
it means all those things, now it's sort of going in the right direction, but it's still not there,
because when I say going in the right direction, I mean, yeah, so you're trying to understand the nature of lust,
so to prevent the future arising, because as I said, the problem is much deeper than just one particular arising of one particular lust,
or whatever, the problem is that it is able to arise, means lust remains possible,
and you're not free from the possibility of your mind being infected by lust, or by aversion, or whatever,
so that's what you need to strive at, so when the lust arises, if there is a pool, or if the angle arises,
if there is an aversion, or whatever you want to call it, that's a problem,
so that's already a problem, the fact that that possibility of anger, and now the actual anger, affects you,
so whatever you do then, will be an account of that lust, will be an account of that anger,
so that's already not good, fundamentally speaking, but it's still within that of, it's not ideal,
since you cannot but not do anything, because you're not free from the nature of it, you're not free from the nature of lust,
so you will end up whatever you do, will be because of the reason of lust,
so then the best, and that's what you can do, is aim that whatever you have no choice but to do,
is aim that undoing the nature of the lust, so restraint, reflection that undermines the nature of lust and so on,
so yes, that's a form of response, which means, and if you need to respond, means you're affected,
so as I said, for a protrusion, or in the case of the creation of you, or that's not a snake, that's a rope,
well, you have to go and find out it's a rope, that's completely misdirected, that's directed outside, projected onto the thing,
so if, and there is a natural tendency, like if there is a lustful object causing, like,
infecting your mind with lust, you're trying to find the fault in the object, or find the fault in the object that causes you the anger and stuff,
and that's already misplaced, so you have to be able to accept it, accept responsibility for it,
means we stand at a rising, for as long as he wants to rise, which I wait, he wants to rise,
and then, you have to think carefully, and wisely basically make that whatever you do,
won't be misdirected at the particular thing, or internally or externally, or both tonight,
you won't be thinking about, like, feeling bad about you, or hating on the object, or hating on yourself,
whatever, you want to do, a type of reflection that will end at that possibility of lust, of a version of delusion,
of the fact that you are still subject to it, whether the present arise and just reminded you of that, then you're still subject to it,
but when you start dealing with it, you want to develop your effort, so to speak,
that they transcend the particular concern about this lustful object, or that hateful object,
but start dealing with the nature of lust and nature of hate, and it's extra hard in the beginning,
because the mind is pulled by the object, and the problem means the object, but actually it's not,
that's why delusion is a habit that's been cultivated for so long, so now the assumption that what has arisen now,
what bothers me, whether in, by causing lust or aversion, that's the problem, I need to deal with it,
and you feel immediate satisfaction, because you dealt with it, one way or the other,
and you gave in or overcome, and that's still misplaced, but the more you look at it,
the more that becomes obvious, that actually, yeah, I might be able to deal with this particular problem,
with this particular arising, with a particular thing that I just perceived, but what if I can't?
Or, more likely, and everybody experienced that, yeah, I could deal with it, and I dealt with it, and then what, until the next one comes along,
and then the next one, and then the next one, and then the next one.
I know, yeah, and I would not deal with something like that.
I would dealt with it completely, and it's like, oh, okay, I've already done so much.
So that type of escape, it's not really an escape, you don't want to have to do anything,
so as I said, in that Hindu Christian example of, oh, you have fear arising on a kind of snake that you just seen,
that's it.
Now they say, ah, but then you look closer, and then turns out it's a rope,
therefore your fear was not real, that's completely misdirected,
because what if you can't look closer, or what if you look even closer, and you find out it's a snake?
That looks like a rope.
You don't want to have to do anything on a kind of thing,
because that means, well, it's good or bad, you're affected by that thing.
If you need to respond to it, if you need to find out that the rope, that that snake is a rope,
means you were affected by the nature of the arising of a thing.
So once you start thinking like that, whether you see a snake or a rope,
there's a matter.
You see, I think fear arose, that's the problem, that's what you deal with it,
and you're not concerned to go and look closer to see if it's a rope,
because ah, yeah, good, then my fear is not real.
That particular fear turned out to be unfounded,
but finding out it's unfounded, it's a different experience from the original fear.
So even if it was the actual rope, the two thought it was a snake,
it was a real experience as such.
It was experience of something I think is a snake that turns out actually to be a rope
that is frightening me.
So that's why that doesn't work, and that's why psychology doesn't work either,
in terms of freedom from suffering.
It always requires this management response in regard to things that arise and both of you.
And again, you just stop and think about it, yeah, I might be able to deal with this,
but now I am able to walk and find out that it's a rope.
But what if I can't do it?
Then I remain affected by this fear that might be unfounded or not,
but either way, it is real as such, because you can say, oh, it's not real,
the fear is not real, because that might be a rope.
You can say even that, but even then, in that case,
the experience of unreal fear is still frightening.
So where do you label it real, or unreal, or both, or neither?
The fact that on the level of feelings there is suffering, that's the problem.
So it requires a magical belief that unreal frees me from suffering.
The only connection between the two is the ignorance,
not knowing that actually your suffering remains unaffected.
And that's how it works.
You see as something a snake, whatever arises,
there is always an implicit possibility of it being otherwise.
And that's just the nature of things.
So in the same way, oh, I saw a snake, fear arose.
If you don't misplace the problem, if you don't project it out onto that thing
that you just perceived, if you just take it as a reminder that
you can still be frightened, means you're not free from the nature of fear,
regardless of any particular manifestation of it, an object that manifests it,
then if you find out one way or the other, that it's a rope,
then that experience of the rope is the experience of the rope
that I thought it was that snake.
So there is a relief on the particular level,
but if you look at it as an nature thing, it means,
next time it might actually be a snake.
The next time I might see a rope, that I think it's a rope and I'm not afraid,
then I come closer and I realize it's a snake.
So how does then, like this interpretation of Christian stack up,
saying, oh, well, see, it was a rope.
Therefore, your fear and your whole experience is an illusion,
there's nothing to be afraid of.
Well, what if it's either way around?
What if you think it's a rope, but then it's a snake,
because there are snakes in the world, then what?
Then you hold on.
Now this illusion, you can still call it an illusion,
but it doesn't reduce your fear anyway.
Because you can say, oh, crap.
The experience of non-threatening things
can be threatening if I find out closer.
So your reverse completely,
but that's why you need a belief and blind belief,
whereby you only look selectively at the things that suit you.
Because in reality, actually,
the letter belief is more closer to the nature of things,
whereby you think that everything can be a snake.
Why? Because an arising of things, in general,
upon which your existence depends,
and is defined by, will see, eventually, death.
So rather than like, oh, no, it's all illusion, I'm fine.
You can undo it and say, well,
even the pleasure that I'm experiencing here,
or even the peace that I'm experiencing here,
in that sense, you can say, it's illusory,
because it will come to an end.
But then you realize that's not the illusion they talk about.
They talk about the illusion selectively,
denying its existence,
because that temporarily, momentarily,
frees you from fear.
But even if there is a mistake,
like if you're perceiving something that is not like that,
that experience of a mistake,
experience of illusion is real as such.
And it's irrelevant,
in a sense, because whether it's real or illusory,
the fact that it can make you feel,
that's where the problem is.
Feeling is the problem,
not what you've just perceived or not.
So just thinking of that becomes apparent that,
well, thinking of that,
will make the attitude of denial saying,
oh, the world, the experience, this is not real,
this is not real.
It will make it basically hollow,
impotent.
Oh, it's leaking here.
It will make it impotent,
because it works only if you don't look at the other side of the picture.
It's not real, it's the denial,
that frees you from temporarily,
well, seemingly frees you from,
oh, I'm relieved now, it was actually a rope.
But as I said, if you reverse,
and then don't stop this,
yeah?
Denire your rope.
Denire your snake by finding out it's a rope.
Now, deny that rope.
Denire that piece as well.
Why do you stop there?
If you only go to deny this pleasure,
as a former escape,
well, why do you,
like you can't in good faith,
then don't deny peace.
So I'm relieved of what if it's a snake.
And it just shows you that things are subject to change,
even if they don't necessarily change.
And then you realize,
I cannot control.
Things changing.
Thus, the peace I feel now
on account of this particular change
is out of my control too.
And that's frightening.
But then at the same time,
the suffering that I feel on account of these things right now
is also out of my control.
And that's liberating.
So now you want to bend in both.
You want to realize that, well, actually,
it's irrelevant.
Whether it's, I think,
it's real or not real.
The fact is, it arises as such.
And as such, my feelings depend upon it.
And as such, I have no control over them.
And that's why Arhan doesn't feel pleasure.
No, this pleasure.
He's not subject to, you know,
to, like, delight and lustful excitement
and that form of pleasure.
No, he's subject to suffering.
Because both are seen as dependent upon
things that arise externally.
And as such, something that is
fundamentally beyond your control.
He's seen the day you change the result.
That's it.
The danger, the gratification and the escape.
The gratification being just basic.
Sorry?
The gratification being of things arise.
Well, there is a degree of pleasure.
So gratification is confirmation and delight
and rejoicing in that pleasure.
But you have to start seeing that pleasure,
whether you're gratified or not,
as impermanent, as lonely,
unworthy and attractive.
Because, hey, look, they're similar from the suitors.
They're a big cup of beautiful beverage
pleasing in every sense.
So, they smell nice,
nice, nice, nice,
resistance in everything.
Nice taste.
Now, it looks beautiful,
but it has poison in it.
You cannot detect,
but you know that there is a poison.
So, that's still there.
It's not real.
And the joy of drinking,
of experiencing that taste,
is also real.
If you don't know that it has poison,
you'll drink it and you'll enjoy it.
If you know that it has poison,
well, you'll drink it,
and your mouth will still enjoy it.
But you won't enjoy it,
because it will be overpopulated or overloaded.
Overrided.
Overrided.
It will be overridden.
Well, it will be overwhelmed
by the fear of the knowledge
that actually you are drinking poison.
So, you won't drink it.
No matter how pleasing it is,
fully discerning the danger,
the poison in it,
you will not give in to the gratification of it.
So, there is no...
That's why,
you mustn't deny things,
even beautiful and chanting things,
because by denying them,
the natural gratification is being denied,
and you're not understanding it,
which means you're still trying to buy it.
So, obviously, that's when you should indulge.
I mean, like, no,
that means going to drink poison, no.
You have to refrain from drinking poison,
but you have to recognize
that the validity of its pleasure
still stands on certain level,
on the level of taste,
on the level of sight,
on the level of smell, touch, ears.
On that level,
it remains,
but you can discern through that,
and then the knowledge,
because that knowledge cannot be perceived.
Poison is undetectable.
So, the whole idea of Krishna
escape, of denial,
my illusion reality,
just doesn't work,
because there are certain things
that have only been known,
not perceived.
So, you can go and see that the rope is a snake,
and the snake is a rope or whatever.
Or you can do a scientific experiment,
and find out that it has traces
of what if it's undetectable
by any means,
you can approach it through your senses.
When the only thing you have is a thought,
that there is a poison in it,
which is why it's so hard to develop.
But if it is developed,
no amount of pleasure coming from the five senses
can actually take you back there,
because the knowledge is developed
on a more fundamental level,
that precedes the senses
in that structural sense.
So, they just,
they're powerless then.
If you know that there is a poison,
if you calculate that thought enough,
obviously, if there weren't no poison in centrality,
no matter how much you think that there is a poison,
it would not get established.
But because in reality,
there is a poison in centrality,
thinking that there is a poison
will eventually yield the result
of you recognizing that poison in a knowledge,
which is how the dama works.
If the things that the Buddha taught about
were not actually already there in those things,
you thinking of things
will not be able to take root,
which means I don't think you will not be possible.
But because those things are there,
thinking according to the way that those things are,
will eventually make you recognize
that those things are there.
But it takes time, which is why
the repetition is necessary for practice.
It's not you see it once,
like you move the curtains
and you see what's outside.
No. You need to keep doing it,
and doing it, and doing it,
until that almost,
that artificial view of looking for poison
that you don't see, you don't detect nothing.
Get so established,
and when it's established,
then you will actually see the poison,
see the danger.
And because that danger was truly there,
your practice corresponded to it,
even without your knowledge,
and then it got confirmed,
and now you know.
And that's what that was the same.
That's like transition from puttuja
into a saltabana.
He doesn't know in the beginning,
but he's doing it,
and looking at things correctly,
according to the nature of things,
he doesn't know.
So there is that faith,
as the first step necessary,
that he had to take on something,
he doesn't know if it's right,
even the Buddha's teaching,
and then he kept doing it,
doing it, doing it,
and because it was right,
because it was how things were,
then that becomes apparent eventually,
and then it's confirmed from him,
so he doesn't need any more faith.
Now he sees directly for himself
that those things are there.
Which is why you have the
centralities, one of the types of,
one of the assumptions,
one of the opadanas.
That's exactly how it works.
You just assume something based on not knowing,
but then you have no reference to know.
So you have to accept and trust
that there is a poison in centrality.
And then whenever there is a pleasure
or pull or enchantment or delight,
you keep like pasting the idea
of poison over it.
So it's artificial,
because you're not seeing it.
But because it is actually there,
and you have faith that it's actually there,
it will sort of take its roots,
much like when you graft a plant,
you bring a completely alien different plant,
different tree, different branch to this tree.
And you graft it.
And then it takes over,
and then it merges and becomes a new tree.
That's how you actually have to take the view externally,
which is why an utterance of another is necessary.
And obviously knowing how to apply it.
And that's why we refer to the darkness,
the ancient part,
that was already there just gets obscured.
If it weren't, no monografting can take root,
because it doesn't correspond to it.
And that's why it's necessary
for a Buddha or somebody of that standard,
so to speak, to rise in the world,
because it's not enough to see it once.
Like you might want to think that there is a poison
that centrality is unwanted.
But unless you have faith,
unless somebody told you that you have to keep seeing that
over and over and over again,
you won't do it.
Which means that the true nature of
poison and the danger of sensuality
will not be discerned.
Because it's not enough to do it once,
which means you can't do the dharma by accident,
or by luck, or by sheer chance.
Or by sheer chance,
I realize that there is a poisonous sensuality.
Because it's undetectable.
So basically that knowledge,
or there might be a poison,
even if you don't see it.
That's the most you're going to get,
a possibility, but even then.
So that's why someone's pathogen
can't free themselves from sensuality.
There is a possibility of this beautiful
tasty beverage being poisonous,
as a similar.
So there is always that possibility.
But unless you have a good reason
to entertain the possibility,
and act according to it,
you won't do it.
Because it just seems unreal,
actually.
Seems face, seems artificial,
seems imaginary,
because it is on that level.
But if you keep doing it,
turns out there was a poison
and now you're liberated from it.
So you can't have pathogens
free from sensuality.
So it's the same principle
like that when it comes to self-view.
But you can't do that by yourself,
because it's yourself doing it.
So you have to take on something completely externally
by somebody who already done it
and then keep doing it.
And then eventually,
it will correspond to the nature of things,
which is that nothing can be yourself.
So it's the same principle
of it's undetectable,
because your whole experience is about yourself.
Someone says, well, it's not self.
So you can hear, oh, okay,
there's no self.
There's no self.
But then there's no self.
It's the experience of yourself.
So you have to discern
the lack of self
in the reason things.
But you can't perceive,
you can't see it,
you can discern it.
So the mind comes first
and all the senses meet in the mind,
and so on.
Which is why again,
the common contemporary interpretation
of impermanence
as a flux and things changing
and the modern science has proven
that nothing is permanent
because the atoms are like,
that's all based on perception.
And the starch makes no difference.
Yeah, I can say this chair is unreal,
but if I'm personal,
I attach to that chair.
And even if I know
it's unreal,
you're breaking it.
I'll suffer.
I've got my attachment.
How many of you say it's not real?
I've seen things externally.
It's whether it's real or not real
or moving or not.
As such, it is real.
The fact that it has a reason
means it's real.
Oh, that's just delusion.
Delusion is real.
So the type of the danger
of the escape with the gratification
and the escape is something
you cannot perceive through your senses.
So saying that all the objects
are impermanent,
oh, this is all changing constantly.
That makes no difference.
Because as such,
as changing constantly,
it's real.
And as such,
you're not free from the nature
of the rising.
Yeah, nature is not impermanence.
Yeah.
And nature is basically
the impermanence
in terms of,
well, things that think
I think is impermanent
because it has a reason.
Not because you witnessed its cessation.
Whatever has the nature of a rising
for that reason
is subject to nature's ceasing,
even if it's still persisting
right in front of you.
Because depending on something
that I have no control of.
Well, yeah.
Well, that's something
that becomes apparent
if you're still looking
at the manifestation of things.
And when I say manifest,
I don't mean like
seeing things through your senses
or something.
I mean them manifesting
as phenomena,
which is sometimes through a sense
through a sense,
sometimes through a mind.
So even the biggest
weird delusional thoughts
are really such.
You can designate them,
you can talk about them.
You cannot perceive them
by your five senses,
but you can perceive them
by your mind.
They're there.
So that's all real.
So you have to acknowledge that
and then it becomes apparent
that whatever has the nature of a rising
is out of your control.
Like you have no say.
Well, actually,
you have no access
to the point that they are rising
from where they are rising.
They're just there.
You just find them already there.
So even if you're just witnessing
something appearing,
when that thing appears,
appears as if
it's there beforehand.
Simultaneous.
Not necessarily time-involving time.
Or yes, this can be asked to know.
Simultaneous appears
as something before.
So for that reason,
you realize the roots,
the foundations of that thing
are inconceivable,
inaccessible to you.
And that's what impermanence is.
Even if that thing remains standing
for the rest of your life,
which is actually your body,
you can't let everybody disappear
and get destroyed
and you still remain standing.
And things are around these
because, well,
it's possible for them to run
because consciousness.
Well, yes.
See, but even that.
There has to be consciousness.
You can't see that directly.
You can explain that.
Because the consciousness.
But then you're conceiving that consciousness
as the cause of the rising of the things.
That's you're conceiving it as yourself.
You're enclosed within the five aggregates
and they're manifested.
For the reason they're manifested,
they are impermanent.
Is enclosed within the five aggregates.
Yeah.
You can't step outside of them.
So you can't say consciousness.
Is this consciousness? Is that?
Well, you can't do that.
It's because you can't face.
Yes.
But you can...
Well, no.
In terms of all of the aggregates.
You cannot own them.
You can just...
You can describe it.
Well, yes, but your description is such.
Appropriate to them.
Saying consciousness is the reason for this.
You're just appropriated it.
So I can't say it arises
like this particular thing.
Whatever it is.
My hand arises within consciousness.
Within the...
Self-consciousness. No.
No.
Because that would mean like consciousness
is some sort of vessel.
And which things appear.
Which means you take the ownership of the vessel.
But arises with consciousness.
Well, within your whole experience
is within the five aggregates and closed.
So when you have the experience of my hand
as a reason,
the experience of having a hand
that is realizing in your experience
is within already.
You can't step outside of it.
And saying that arises
inside of the consciousness
or inside of this means stepping...
means putting it into something.
Which means you adapt.
Which is outside.
You become the vessel
in which things arise.
Therefore you become its owner.
No.
Whatever the aggregate is manifested.
It's found there beforehand.
Seal teniously is manifestation.
So whether it's a perception of your hand
or your feeling
or just the knowledge of something
means
it's manifested.
And you have no say in that manifestation.
You have no say.
Absolutely no say.
They arise on their own accord.
They persist on their own accord.
And that's within that.
That's why they're impermanent.
So again,
witnessing something disappear
means taking an external view
in regard to their disappearance.
And as such,
their disappearance will not pertain to a
a Nietzsche,
which is the personal impermanence.
The impermanence that frees you from suffering.
Well, because you're just with witness
to the external,
which means that which was witnessing
and it remained unaffected by it.
But if you recognize,
well, it's not because
cessation of things
is something that's manifested.
And as such,
it's impermanent
because it's manifested,
not because it's ceasing.
So rising is manifested.
Cessation is manifested.
Persisting while changing is manifested.
All of those things are impermanent.
Impermanence is in regard to all of them.
Not just bound with cessation.
Well, the dead nature of impermanence
is superimposed to any of those
particular manifestations of it.
It's on a different level.
Simultaneous to present,
inseparable from,
but on a different level.
It pertains to the nature of things.
A rising, the nature of arising,
the nature of ceasing,
the nature of persisting while changing.
Well, the three things have come.
They have a nature.
A nature.
That nature is manifested
and as such,
it's impermanent for the reason
that it's manifested.
If you were able to be a creator,
if you were able to be a creator,
you would be able to take the possession
of cessation, that thing,
which means you can have it as long as you want,
but you can't.
You can't even conceive,
you can't even access the point
where things manifest.
You just find them as manifested,
even if it's simultaneously right now.
And as such,
when they cease,
that's also inaccessible to you.
Which is why the aggregates cannot be actually assumed
in the first place.
They cannot be held by up and down in the first place.
We can't take them up.
Not knowing that you can't take them up,
that's how you take it up.
So again, arising is manifested.
Ceasing is manifested.
Resisting while changing is manifested.
Manifestation is that,
which is impermanent.
Not those particular lines,
not those particular lines,
