No, especially in the beginning, like when you actually start developing the concept
of celibacy or the idea that this is what you should be striving at, they come a point
the whole world will feel upside down when it comes to that, like any confidence that
you build and whatever else, it just completely gets undone. And yeah, one look at it, one
eye content, it's enough to crack it, completely overwhelmed you. For a good, well, in the beginning
at least, it will blow down to enduring it, not pursuing it in any way, and also not
pursuing it physically, not looking for the loophole, and then as the as the suitors would
often say, seeing the danger in the slightest fault, and that means like if you have an attitude
of looking for a loophole, even if you're not necessarily pursuing any loophole that you
might find, that attitude is already on hold some state of looking for a loophole, means
ah, you're not seeing the danger in the slightest fault, means you're looking for a letter
of the rule to keep you from breaking it, or to allow your loophole, while actually you
should look for the origin of such action, which is your own mind, which is whether it's
rooted in wholesome, or unwholesome. And if you're looking for a loophole, it's definitely
rooted in a wholesome, because you know, like there was that, I was just talking with
Tanya the other day, and ah, you know, the rules for the monks evolved, they were not
always 200, and ah, 27, there was 150 before, or less, and ah, there was the whole, ah,
the whole point was, they were kind of a product of circumstances and so on, but they were,
they were the basic principles, the A-principles, for example, are the basic principles, and
they were, they were, they were, that monk couldn't keep all 150, whatever it was, and I thought
that it was before others, the former, and he went to the Buddha and said, it's too much,
I'm going to this rope, because I can't keep all these rules, ah, and then the Buddha
said, well, you can just keep the three rules, don't do anything unwholesome, by body, by
speech or by mind, and that's it. Or then another occasion, when Mahvajapati went to
ask the Buddha for a brief instruction before she goes for a little retreat, and so she
can commit to the practice, and he said, whatever you know, it's unwholesome, abandoning
whatever you know, it's wholesome, don't look out for it, and there was enough for her
to become another hand, because it comes down, all the way down, deep inside, to your thought.
Obviously, you have to have enough mindfulness established to be recognizing thoughts as
things, as phenomena that has arisen, but once you do, then you can actually see, and
it's not, if you do see the level, it won't require them, it's much harder to restrain
after your thoughts have been taken up, your level of the speech has been taken up, and
ah, you're just kind of not quite doing unwholesome things with your body, so you're just
enduring this buildup. But when you go back down to where your thoughts are, it's literally
just like with the stream, where the river just originates, when it's a tiny little stream,
and then it doesn't require much effort to stop it, but it doesn't require discernment
to spot it. So, when you go to the origin, if you say, that is where you can see that
you are responsible for. Oh yeah, that's when you see that you are the one making
unwholesome or unwholesome, accepting unwholesome, ignoring wholesomeism and so on. So, in
the beginning, you have to kind of start by like, you know, crude restraint, just not
doing, not looking, not saying whatever else, but that's like, that's far from being a
goal in itself. You do all of that just to eventually, through practice of mindfulness
and reading the sutras and developing and understanding of the Dharma, you can start
distinguishing these things in your thoughts already rooted in it. And if at that level
you address and literally just abstain from unwholesome on the level of the thoughts, that's
already like a straight path in itself. But that really does mean throughout the day,
you have to be mindful of your thoughts and then when you recognize it, unwholesome thoughts
just, you don't tolerate it. Doesn't mean you shouldn't be feeling like this or you
should, oh, these thoughts are wrong, I was a big mistake. No, you're nothing to do
with their arising, thoughts arise and cease. You have to, a lot to do with, exactly,
with their accepting, like you accept the pleasing ones, you don't accept ones, you don't
accept ones, you don't want. But then you change the criteria, when you reach to their
level, you change the criteria. So, it's not any more what I want, what I don't want,
it's what I know it's wholesome and what I know it's unwholesome. So, whatever it's unwholesome,
you don't want it. And the Buddha said, the deal German, he doesn't entertain such thoughts,
he doesn't indulge in them, he doesn't welcome them, he doesn't wish for them. And so on,
which means they might have a reason, but by him not entertaining them in any shape or form,
this is. So, no engagement with unwholesome has taken place. And if no engagement of unwholesome
takes place at that very deep root level, where it's certainly nothing can kind of, of the same
kind, happen further down the stream. Why? Because the stream hasn't been polluted in its origin,
it means even at the very end it will be still the clean wholesome streams.
So, and that pertains to any type of thoughts, whether it's, when it type of unwholesome thoughts,
whether it's essential thoughts, thought of ill will and anger, malice, thought of delusion,
like just just thoughts that are kind of revolving on indolence, laziness, indulgence of any kind.
You know that those unwholesome thoughts and you accept them. And that's how the five hindrances
work as well. They arise on their own. They're like almost manifestations of, you know, having a
body. The body gets tired, the body gets excited, the body gets agitated and so on. But you enter
painting that. What was that was it? That's, that's a double wing moth. It sounds like a double wing
plane as well. So, basically by, but the five hindrances, by not entertaining them,
they cease to be hindrances. They cease to be obstacles. And the mind rises above them.
That's what's bothering me, I'm entertaining it. It's just that. Yeah, you are, you are.
It's, it's certain in the beginning. I do, I do at times I would like force myself not to pursue it.
I further carry on with it, like, you know, whatever I'm, I've been thinking thinking and, you know,
I'm not, I'm not, I'm not carrying forward with this forward. And, you know, it makes some effort,
but I do it. And I feel a bit, please, like, you know, a bit happy or whatever, but,
and I see that I had to keep doing it. And, you know, but it's just the fact that my day is spent
just on that, just struggle that, like, either pursuing it or struggling with it. You know,
I'm not doing it practically anything else. Yeah, well, that's, that's basically the,
the environment you live in. The, you know, the, the common household, it exposure to, you know,
pretty much any sensual aspect you want, food, music, entertainment.
So, you need to, yeah, you need to re-evaluate, see how serious you are. And then you have to change it,
you have to take that leap, that step, and then change it. And by changing, I mean, you go to the
environment that doesn't support such an easy access to those things. So, it's a, it's a risky step,
obviously, but then again, like, yeah, you can choose to stay and then what? You're not going to live
forever, you know, way down. So, what, you're just going to be setting and indulging every, every
window, the risers, and giving completely in, which is the hating yourself. The day before that,
the day before that. Yeah. No, the thing that I see myself developing in a way, like, as you said,
like that, the rest of the sensual stuff, I'm doing pretty decent. Like, even the food-wise,
at times I see, like, I'm trying to, you know, trying to enjoy, and I like, I'll take a step back,
you know, and like, music and the other really, and to say, and, you know, other sensual stuff,
I'm handling well. Yeah, the problem is, you will not, if you're waiting for yourself to feel,
like, oh, I am ready now, they'll never come. Actually, I think I'm really afraid,
it's going like, because this is probably like my, from going to Australia, that's probably my,
I'm on the opportunity, I can't, can't invest again, I don't have the money. Yeah, I know, I was in the
very, very, very similar position. I mean, I had one shot at it. I don't want to, like, go there,
and I see, you know, if I see some, you know, women coming, stay at them, or whatever, and offend them,
and, you know, do some opportunity. Yeah, yeah, all that, all that is a little risk. So,
that's just something you have to, well, you have to accept really, and then face it,
exactly, and then be stronger than it. Because if you wait, or I'm just waiting for the circumstances
to be right for me to feel ready to go, it'll never happen, because, you know, your whole mind
is taken by matter, which means it'll never make you ready for it. It's always going to be something,
and often you have, I mean, I've seen so many people coming to monasteries over the years,
and they always kind of come and sort of are looking for a place, but they have the attitude of,
they're looking for a perfect place, they're looking for a place that will do the practice for them,
which means they'll never find that place, which means they'll never actually start the practice,
and they know that. You kind of, by putting the responsibility for the practice onto circumstances,
be it a place, or if everything falls in place, I can really go and do it or what else,
you'll never do it. It will never be perfect. Why? Because your judgment of perfection is actually
skewed. It's, it's unhulsing. So what you're waiting to be perfect can never happen, because
if it will happen, means that the matter would encourage you to practice, and they will never
happen. The matter will never encourage you to go against them. It will always make it hard,
whenever you choose to go against the stream, which is why it's referred to as against the stream.
So that against the stream starts from the very first step. So you might be inspired about it,
you might have determination to do it, but it will never be, oh yes, I'm going with the grain now,
and I'm practicing, no, it always has to be against it, which is why it's risky, it's not a
guarantee, it's a success. So you don't really know when you do make that step, whether you made it too
soon, or whether, you know, am I too late, or is it just, but then at the same time, well,
you don't really know what too soon is, you don't really know what too late is. One thing you know
is, it's going to be hard, and one thing you know is, well, you can always prevail, and that's it.
So if you fail, it's not because it was too soon, it's not because it was too late, it's because
you failed, it's because you didn't prevail, you didn't overwhelm you, you didn't overwhelm it,
and that's it, the development, exactly. So you know enough, I'm not like not specifically
look like one knows enough, you have the idea about the monastic life, what it entails,
what the priests are, where the practices to be found, and that's it. So you might be doubt,
so whatever else, but all that comes from those hindrances I was just talking about.
So it all boils down whether you succeed or not in the end, and for that you are solely responsible.
For as long as your senses, your faculties are intact, you still have your life and so on,
means there's absolutely no reason to not succeed. So if you don't succeed then yeah,
you'll have this reason, and that reason, too soon, too late, and this, and that,
if you succeed, none of it matters. Why? Because none of it matters to begin with.
If the practice was truly depending upon circumstances, as well, to be done,
you wouldn't be able to do it. So unless your faculties are impaired,
anything like that happens, then yeah, there's nothing really stopping you from doing it,
it's just very strong enough or not. I see, I see a lot of similarities with any sort of like
intoxicant, like, you know, I see myself trying to stop, then yeah, like, and, well, actually,
the nature of addiction is well within the nature of sensuality in general. Addiction is just a
particular manifestation of the nature of sensuality. Any addiction is just a more concentrated
manifestation of what actually nature of sensuality is. I see myself like wanting one last
hit, one last time, and when I get there, I won't know. I see what you mean, like, unless I take the
step, it doesn't really seem going to change. You might like, oh, it's just one last hit of whatever
was providing me with a hit, and then I'll do it. But that was already, like, flowed attitude to
begin with. That hit is something that, once you get it, well, now there is a prospect of another
last hit, because this was not last anymore. It was last before you'd done it. Once you've done it,
well, now is a possibility of another hit, which is, oh, well, there will be the last hit.
So you never stop. So you realize, well, the only way to stop is to stop. The last hit won't stop
you. The first hit, the hundred won't know. The way to stop is to stop, and not give importance
whether it's a beginning of the hit, end of the hit, or middle of the hit. Now you stop independent
off the hit. And that's what I was just saying about circumstances. You stop regardless of
the circumstances, whether it's, whether it feels like I was just halfway through this or through that, now,
just stop.
Yeah, you have to go above it, I guess, I think, to become, yeah, you have to take the range really and do it.
Because otherwise he's just riding you around. Yeah, you can't, you can't have someone who's
an Aryan or a noble, noble person who is being led by his caretaker. Oh, come, you know, he's
not like that. An Aryan is a strong person. Yes, he's not, he's not weak. And so by the beginning
of the argument, you always have to do, you know, you have to go above things, they're basically
anything that promotes that. Yeah, that's why the Buddha would say, and this is like, you know,
whatever was to be obtained by the manly effort, manly exhaustion, I have a pain.
It's got nothing to do. And there isn't a greater manly effort than going against, you know,
yourself. The going against the entire grain. And then all we're powering, there's another
sutra where the Buddha says the mind of the Aryan doesn't overwhelm him, he overwhelms his mind.
Means whatever arises in the mind, he's strong in the neck. Obviously that strength can't
come to his force. He's going against it. It comes through like direct discern, full insight,
which which all the power is, isn't it? What about like faith in like the beginning, you know,
you've done it. Faith is necessary in the beginning. Obviously not faith is not a goal in itself
as it is in Christianity and many other religions. It's just faith that there is hope,
that if I make the effort, I can be free. So I have faith in that. I have faith that my efforts are
leading me the right way. But then when you know for fact, when your efforts are confirmed,
when you know that you are on the right way, then the faith is automatically, well faith disappears.
Because you don't need to believe that you're on the right way when you know that you're on the
right way. So confidence, knowledge replaces the faith. And the sutras refer to as confirmed
confidence. It's sort of when it gets and then develops further and further and further.
When it just went for the light, that is a big thing, isn't it?
It's just a big thing, isn't it? Well, it's actually two phases. And then ultimately for an
other hand, you know, he has no faith anymore because he became fully developed in regard to
dominant practice. He completely went against the grain and now he can't. He just can't be overwhelmed
in a sense. He can't be brought back with the grain anymore. He can't be pulled everywhere.
He just went beyond. Like the noble aid for path goes against the grain and then for an other hand, he goes beyond
the noble aid for path. So grain against the grain and then there is completely going over it and
that's it. You can't get back.
Do some, like I asked myself, I can say with central thoughts. Well, I've asked myself in fact,
do I want to actually get beyond those things? Do I really want to go beyond that? Do I want to be free
from sensuality? And then yours, yeah. Well, there's a good reflection and it reminded, you know,
on a daily basis because as I was just saying, any form of sensuality in a wholesome is being
entertained, which is why it's present. It arises on its own. But if you're feeling a central pool
of any kind or a pool of ill will or anger means up, you have already accepted it. You've already
entertaining it. So then the reminder, well, hold on. Do I want to go beyond this genuinely? Yes.
Then you'll well, then entertaining it becomes more obvious and then you you kind of won't do it.
Obviously, you know, the more you do it, the more like the more you refrain from entertaining the
more the more of practicing that inside, then you become more proficient at it and it gets easier.
But in the beginning, yeah, it's just like really enduring it when it arises and then trying to
make the most of it when it's not present. Most of it in terms of practice, I mean. But you're like,
what is what is sensuality ever done for you? You throw your arm
endlessly. Yeah. And you've had it. You've had it before. What more is it going to do?
You know, what is it going to achieve? We're just talking about it a few minutes, I think,
before we start, is according like any form of sensuality of any sense kind of has its
combination like taste, sound, touch. So you realize it's never going to be more than that.
So what then differs is just like having different ways of arriving at that combination.
Like different ways of obtaining taste, different ways of obtaining touch, different ways of
obtaining sounds, smells and so on. So it's just like it becomes an indulgent
anticipation of something that you've been through many times before. So then that's why you need
to like people kind of become really like connoisseurs of how really taking slowly, sorry,
because if you just arrive at the end of it, it says, oh, that's it. So you have to build up that
anticipation, that delight. And that's what sensuality is, delighting in the prospect.
So that's why a lot of people spend lots of time masking and developing various elaborate ways
of arriving at something plain and simple. Like just a combination of the pleasure of any particular
sense. And that's it. That's all. If you approach it like that, then it's quite flat actually.
So you have to refrain from that attainment, not from delighting in the prospect of it.
And attaining it, you know, teasing it, leaving it for longer. So then you can kind of have
greater pleasure. But again, the nature of that pleasure inherently will always remain the same
and can never be anything more than that. And you know, obviously the extent people go
for the central pleasure is just having family and children, everything. It all comes as a result of that.
And those are serious commitments, serious actions that affect other people.
But it all touches, oh, I want the kids, I want this, I want family, I want people,
next to me, I want companions, whatever else. And it's a form of just kind of
getting to that pleasure. You commit to all sorts of things to great extents.
And then when you get it, then you live as well. Now you're too deep in to just leave it all out.
Why? On a kind of sensuality. You just went too far.
To admit it, it took too much on. The burn is too heavy and you can't turn away from it anymore.
But even then it's not impossible. Like it's easier when you don't have many things
pulling you back in terms of responsibilities, but say even if you're a king of the ruler of
the entire country with lives and kids or whatever else. Again, nothing stops you from a decision
made in a moment to just leave it all behind. As the Buddha did.
Let alone, if you have much less responsibilities and opportunities as he did,
all people like it. Like becoming an anticipator, like being professional anticipating things.
Yeah, that's really what runs people's lives, anticipation, which is, you know, delight,
like you delight at the future prospect. Oh, I'm going to like I'm about to have this. I'm
going to have it. That anticipation, like always having something in stores. It's how people
live their entire lives. Whether in terms of relationships, whether in terms of, you know,
cross-family, career, ambition, achievements, money, obviously, like anticipation,
making money, learning, studying, learning, whatever else. Just all of those things are forms of
anticipation, right? But if you just stop and think you're doing this, well, there is never an
arrival to anything, because that anticipation is actually almost a goal in itself.
Yeah, that's what you do. That delight is what centrality is. That anticipation is the
centrality. It's not the pleasure that you get from it. It's that pool and being shackled by that
anticipation. That's what centrality is. Pleasure is just pleasure. It fully pertains to the senses,
and that's it. But that anticipation is that is something for which you're responsible. The
you're entertaining, the you're engaging, and the driving around completely. Desire and lust, in regard to the things,
the light, and the prospect of pleasure. That's what centrality is. Not the actual pleasure.
So yeah, what is the point? What is what is what do you get from giving up centrality?
Well, like, again, that's it. I want to have one last hit because I'm giving it up forever.
That's how it feels in the beginning. But if you stop and think about it, you realize, well,
what you give it up forever is the anticipation revolving around chasing things up,
this kind of hope and expectation. The actual pleasure that was always pertaining to the senses
remains on the level of senses, and you don't mind giving that up because it was just that.
But the fear arises when because people are dependent upon anticipation and having this kind of
something in store, like something waiting, something hopeful to happen.
And giving that up feels you be dreaded, feels with anxiety, because like, oh, well, boredom is like
nothing then. It's just this. It's just plain boredom. There is no pleasure here at all.
Because for you, pleasure is the pleasure of anticipation, and that is the unwholesome pleasure.
Like craving for underlying tendencies, craving for more. Which means whenever there is anticipation,
there will be more anticipation in regards to that. More delight, breathe more delight.
And that's why it's unwholesome.
So only from the point of view of that, giving up pleasure feels like fearful, feels you with fear.
It seems like hope. But only the beginning. Yeah, because it feels like you're giving up hope.
But that's the thing. If you persevere for it, and not even that long actually, you realize, well,
the senses, they're ultimately the only thing that can experience this pleasure are still there,
whatever. So you don't really, like, they will not use to begin with. So you don't fear giving up
their pleasure, because they'll have something else. And they will have other types of pleasure,
they're not unwholesome. Which is why when you start discerning those types of pleasure,
you can, well, that's how you abandon the unwholesome value. But developing wholesome pleasure,
that it's not based on anticipation. Pleasure of peace, pleasure of content, pleasure of
renunciation, all of those forms of pleasure. And you can actually use them to abandon the unwholesome
types of pleasure. So you need those pleasures at least at least. Well, first you need to start
the renunciation. You need to start to emulate it. And then you can start recognizing the pleasant
aspect of it on account of that wholesome pleasant aspect. You abandon the unwholesome pleasant
aspects, which are pleasant pleasures of anticipation, sensuality, delight, chasing, after things,
and so on. And the hope that that provides...
It seems like such a big challenge. There's the biggest, it's the most difficult things to do.
It's overcome, sensuality, it's overcome anticipation, overcome craving. And how many people can do that?
And people have done that. Yeah. Because it takes so much strength to do that.
But it's far from impossible. Yeah, far from impossible, but it's only like,
there's only a few people can do that. You think about it all. How many people there are currently
on the planet? Yeah. Billions are people. And you're the only one. Yeah, you're the only one
or two people in the world. It's actually making the efforts in that direction and keening your mind.
The rest, they become, you know. No, that's a very, that's like using vanity, using
conceit to your advantage. Like I will be the only one free from sensuality. Because of that,
you will be making efforts to free yourself from sensuality and then you can and you will.
And when you free yourself from sensuality, you won't be, I am the only one free, you won't care
about it. If you free from sensuality. So that that vanity they conceit will vanish with it.
But it did make you strive properly. And that everybody can follow their desires.
It's absolutely zero effort involved. Which is why everybody does it.
But then again, you just have to stop and reflect for a just brief period of time and realize,
well, yeah, sure. Following desire desires doesn't require any effort.
But in order to have the availability for my desires, I need to put up with lots of stuff that I
hate, that I don't want, that I want to be associated with, I don't want to have to do.
But I do it just that I can have a moment where I can just let it go and just flow with the desire
that has a reason and kind of, you know, relax. But then you spend 85, 90% of your life just
putting up with stuff you hate, you don't want so that you can get that 5% satisfaction of just
having your own way and satisfying this particular desire or that particular desire.
Yeah, people work the entire week hard so they can completely, you know,
bring angle man over the weekend and that's their whole life.
Be the master of your weekend.
Yeah, exactly, I mean, that's like the course is kind of example, but basically in principle,
that's the protusion as they like. Like, putting up with stuff, why? Because you want
the family, you want the wife, you want the children, well, now I have to support it,
now I have to work for it, now I have to endure lots of stuff you hate because you committed to this.
And you sort of, you think, again, without much reflection or effort,
you recognize, well, with little bit of effort, with 5% of effort, I can have 95% of my time
not putting up with stuff I hate actually being quite free. That's why they would have compared
like life with someone else and especially if somebody would develop wisdom and inside,
like, free as a deer, roaming as a deer, just go wherever you please, whenever you please,
you're your own master. It's basically what everybody dreams of,
but because being too weak in regard to their own desires, they end up making compromises,
they end up being the burden, their ways down on them, and then you're stuck. It crushes you,
eventually. In the beginning, the overcome the defilement, how do you overcome the fear of the
defilement? To overcome the defilement, how do you overcome the fear of the defilement?
Yeah. What do you mean? Like, for example, the sensuality. If you fear, the sensuality takes
you over and even sort of a life. Well, you don't have to overcome. You use that fear to not engage
you sensuality. You develop more until the sensuality frightens you so much that you do not give it,
as seeing the danger in the slightest fault, seeing the threat in the slightest fault, being afraid of
the slightest fault. And then eventually, when you stop giving into those faults, then that fear will
fail. Because now you're confident that you will not give in, thus you're not going to fear.
That is a heavy rain. Yeah.
It doesn't seem like a five-minute rain in Bamborello.
That's right. It's really raining like this now. And that's still dry. That's good.
Hear the trees are not getting hit. No, it's not hitting here. See this tree is not good.
Thank you. Excellent.
I also think that authenticity is such a power, you know.
Like, if you're authentic, the more authentic you are, the more powerful you become.
Oh yeah. You know, literally you become powerful.
Yeah. And then you know, so even for myself, I know if sensuality comes, if the sexual desire
comes up, I have the power to put it out. Exactly. And again, that's good.
I'm the one doing it. I'm the one actually bringing it back. I can fit you to all things.
When you develop confidence in your own power, mental power, then you don't fear. And again,
that's the similarly from the suitors often compared to a lion, like the lion, the king of the jungle.
It doesn't fear any other horse that he hears, the rise. Why? Because he is the king of the jungle.
It's his role that others fear. So when he sleeps there, somebody rolls some other animals
making noise, he doesn't even flinch. Because he knows nobody's coming out. Nobody can come after him.
So that's when the mind develops, any sensuality, anything that rises like on its own,
you don't fear it because you know, up. You won't overwhelm me. I'll overwhelm that if it comes here.
And it doesn't come there.
So you have been maintaining a department for so long. And you have been maintaining that particular
department quite dedicated to the department.
The staff has to be a graduate of sort of a life, to say, coming off that department.
Well, I mean, as I said, you stop things when you stop them.
You're not kind of waning off it, waiting for it to kind of fade out and stop and do the stopping for you.
So yeah, the longer you've been entertaining a particular habit, a fun wholesome time,
it will be harder to give it up. But you give it up when you give it up.
You stop doing it and then you just endure and you have to withstand any pull.
And those pulls can't last forever. They won't last forever. They will last for as long as
the strength of them lasts. And that strength will last depending on how much basically you
invested in building it up, how much you strengthen that habit of an wholesome time.
And once you say no, it will be pulling you at the beginning harder, but then it will fade out more and more.
So you'd all you have to do is remain undeterred.
It is also, I mean, when the Buddha was dying,
and then an undeterred asks the Buddha, says, what should we do in regards to women? How should we?
And he says, don't look at them.
Yeah, don't look at them.
And then, yeah, what if we have to look at them?
Don't we speak with them?
Why don't you speak with them?
Because then we kind of 45 minds and be mindful.
But then what I was interested in is your being mindful, but it seems to me at different stages.
Because why would you want to be mindful if you can avoid it in the first place?
Like why would you want to have to be mindful in regards to it when dealing,
because basically we have to be mindful because that's the way to build with it.
But why would you wait for that long in order to have to deal with it when you can prevent
you from arising in the first place?
Don't look at it. Don't speak with it.
Then be mindful if you have to do it.
And that was like, basically in regards to that question,
was asked women in a sense of sensuality, for men,
are what should you do? Are you should deal with it?
Like, you'll discern, and it's not about testing yourself or seeing it now.
You see, you cut it into two, you don't engage at the level of sight.
You don't engage at the level of speaking.
If you can't avoid that, well, then you'll be mindful as the last resort in regards to that.
But what?
Because actually being able to prevent it, that's already implying mindfulness at proper time.
Having wisdom to discern it.
Ah, I can prevent this, cuts my work in half.
Because when a Buddha is saying, be mindful, he's not, he's talking about right mindfulness.
So it's also someone who knows what that is.
Yeah, exactly.
You've got to know, I can't do right mindfulness.
I don't have right to do, so I have to avoid these things for the time being.
Yeah, exactly, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Because that result of overcoming this thing, it's still not available.
So you want to basically kind of exclude it then as an option.
And it's in the Hindu tradition, you know, they do seven years of celibacy.
You know, you don't look at women, you don't speak to them.
You're nothing to do with it.
Just to maintain your celibate life, so you can build up this energy and attain some higher status and better.
Because it does, yeah, you have to go through that.
You have to hold back and not be around those things.
So you can actually have a bit of a firm grip on your mind.
Because by not engaging in those things on the level of sight, speech, touch, whatever else,
then your mind can, like, you can know.
Well, encompass it fully as a phenomenal sensuality, attraction, desire, and so on.
By not being engaged.
Because the moment you're engaged with it, well, then already mind is in it,
which means you can be seeing it from a different angle within that.
Which means you can then be possibly seeing correctly how it is to be outside of it.
So you need to actually be outside in order to recognize the view outside.
You can be inside and then you fantasize how it is to be outside, but that's not the same.
So, and again, the similar in the suit does is like being in the water, wet,
having two wet pieces of wood trying to light the fire, but I mean, to get in one work.
So you step outside on the shore, but then you have to wait until that wood dries out,
and then you can start the fire, like light the spark of wisdom and so on.
So yeah, you might have stopped engaging in sensuality, but then you have to
maintain that for a while until the mind dries out.
And then it can discern and see clearly what it is.
You go, you take the pieces of wood out out of the water,
but they're drying out, helps you to see more subtle things where you see, of course,
the origin of these things. It's basically like being wet means your mind is wet,
your thoughts are wet.
And that means it's sort of dampens. There can't be like a fire of wisdom,
energy of wisdom. It can arise because everything is wet, so give it.
So you need to stop making it wet and then you have to, by not making it wet,
you have to persevere in that until it dries out completely.
And then things will become more evident.
I think one of the things that become more evident, I would say, well,
is that sooner when the Buddha talks about giving attention to your masculine features,
to your masculinity, because I find myself if I become not thinking sensual thoughts,
I'm not even saying it as much as I can, you know, I don't do it.
But when I delight in my masculinity, they're implying that I can see it coming,
pushing it or giving it to, how do you say? Pressure really, like. Yeah, funny, you said that,
but I have the same, same, same wishes. But what I find, what I practice with is,
if I do notice that, if I, then I can also either give attention to my masculine feature,
or I feel like powerful in my muscles, or whatever, or I don't, I don't have to do that.
I can feel strong, but I don't have to delight in that. But you need to be dry enough
to be able to see that as well, you know, you can't see that. But I think,
things have to be a bit dry, to see the subtlety. Yeah, but the dry you are,
as I said, the more things you begin to discern, more and more and more, things that you couldn't
have seen because it was a wet. You see where the enemy comes in? Yeah, and that's it. If you come
to that point, then all you have to do is never give attention to masculine signs, which means
they will never be an opening for the attraction in regard to the opposite to a rise.
But it doesn't mean that you become non-masking. No, not at all.
Because in fact, it's what we just spoke about, things, you become very strong.
But it's also not a vanity strength, a rise strength, a strength very based on the physical
appearance of whatever else, is a strength of the mind, which is a different, very different thing.
Yeah, but yeah, it's a valid strength. Well, it's the real strength.
To be honest about why, exactly, the person in my mind doesn't do that.
So, as you said, I'm in the best physical condition I've been in years.
Like, oh, such a waste. Yeah. Yeah, I'm in my prime with something like that.
Yeah, at times I find myself laughing, like, I'm funny, like, the different ways that the mind
approaches the same thing to get it done, like, when it comes to the environment. Yeah.
That's different approaches. And, like, at times when I notice, I'm not complex by how, how,
well, while the cunning, you know, the way the mind approaches the same department, it's just, you know, it's
really laughable. Yeah, well, that's exactly how I'm out of work, really.
And all you have to do is just ignore it. Just don't, don't give a full attention to it.
And, yeah, you'll follow it's course. And if you take you with it,
just turn a blind eye here and there. That's it. Ignore. Ignore it. Ignore it.
Tiredness is sitting in his inventory. It is, yeah. And his heavy rain is not making it easier. Yeah.
I'm sort of feeling that, you know, I start feeling like, oh, I feel like all that happened.
Yeah. But then again. I really say it's one of the ways I'm trying to wipe it. Yeah.
I wore the chopsticks. I wasn't sure. I don't know. It's just a guard.
Well, I was having difficulty as well as when you're watching your mind so closely to see, you know,
whatever you're doing is awesome. You don't want to do that. When it's like, what happens
just you feel, you don't want to, you just want to avoid things. You want to go to sleep rather.
Well, yeah, yeah, that's why the sloth and talk will become a hindrance.
And you see, you see actually how much you don't need sleep. Yeah.
Yeah. You can just keep very little. And the rest of the time it's just I want to just ignore.
I don't want to actually watch my thoughts. I don't want to look at things. That's quite painful.
Well, it can be. It's heavy. Ways in the industry. Yeah. Yeah. The pool.
But again, the thing is with every hindrance, it's actually rooted in the body.
Yeah. So the body does need sleep. The body does get sleepy. The body does get agitated.
The body does get excited. You know, any sensuality experience is completely confined to the body
and bodily senses. So you can, by discerning fully, the extent of, of, uh,
nivarana, the, uh, the hindrance is fully bound with the body. You can actually, you're
surmounted like that. You can never spill over. You can never be anything more than bodily.
So what you have to do is not give into your body and you're going to give into an hindrance.
Well, even the doubt, the doubt, like it's the, the form of the doubt, when you are actually
affected by the doubt, it's, it's felt. You experience it in your body.
Like when the doubt takes over you, when you're panicking on a kind of doubt.
Like I'm doing a lingua. Yeah.
So black side is for this. Yeah. Exactly.
It is a, that's the, the two ways. And also it doesn't, I'm not saying that the five images are
physical in terms of their found in your body, like whatever else. I mean, they put
the same to your body. That's what I like. Yeah. It means they put the same to your body,
the body, the bound with the body. They cannot be experienced without the body.
Yeah. But you're saying then, when this, when you recognize one of the five images,
you should recognize it as arising while the body is there, like you recognize it while the
body is there. That's what it means bound with the body. It means to the extent the body is there.
So you can't be found elsewhere independently of it.
Yeah. So the domain, the domain of the five images is always there in regard to the body.
Basically means the domain is, is maintained through the, if you're not free from possibility
of accepting any of the hindrance that arises on account of body. And when you accept it,
when you give into it, when you're affected by it, all of that, that's when it's a hindrance.
If your mind becomes stronger, literally just stronger than the hindrance. So it doesn't mean
that you never experience sleepiness or like the body never gets excited. No. But the mind is always
on every occasion stronger than any of those things. That means you're not taken by, you cannot be
taken up by any hindrance anymore. But let me work in mind, you're seeing it in the right view,
with the right view. Yeah, the right view will take you there and then it's just the development.
You can see the hindrance. So you can be mindful of your thoughts. But you also have to be able to see it
like the same rising with the body. Yeah, you also have to be strong enough to endure the body
basically, with its pulse. But then means you have to have the right view, like the right view.
Well, yes, but also like, if you don't have the right view, it can certainly enable you to have it.
Well, it's along the right line. So if you don't have the right view, you'll certainly develop one
if you practice like this. So how are we apart there? To turn to your body.
Angle. Well, let's see, you could, you could, it pretends to your body internally and pretends
to the body just externally or just to the body. But as long as a body is there, it will pretend to
do it. Because can you be angry with some, with any person without the image of their body, their
appearance, their face, their tokens, their signs, anything physical, inconceivable, inconceivable.
Even if you say, well, I don't hate, like, I'm not talking about hating the physical aspects.
If you hate what somebody said, you can hate them on account. They said, when you have that
phenomenon of hate present, you have simultaneously that phenomenon is bound with the presence of
their bodily image that you have encountered, the face or the entire, whatever. It will be
pertaining to the bodily aspect, which is not accidental then, that giving into hate will result in you
attacking the physical aspect, whether through verbal abuse, if you have even less respect to
physical abuse. So annihilation, destruction of their physical aspect is the satisfaction of your
anger. Same body desire, sexual desire, sexual desire, inseparable from bodily.
Just inconceivable. You can't have it. You either have to have an image of your bodily present
in a form of giving into the notion of your own masculine, or you have to put up there the
image of the external body's presence or both.
Oh, the wind. Nice.
What I just also noticed before I left, I looked at Kindle, looking to see if there's a suit on
watching two types of thoughts, so by discerning wholesome thoughts and wholesome thoughts,
eventually Eoi enters the first time and so on. But also by discerning the five hindrances,
then the entrance is first done. It's the same. It's the same person.
His five hindrances are basically five ways the unwholesome thought can manifest itself.
And over a path in them, it can be unwholesome. So by recognizing the domain of the five hindrances,
you sort of overcome the domain of unwholesome manifestation.
It's what I like is it's just a simple thing. It's a very simple thing.
Depending on how far you pursue it, how clearly you discern it, that will determine how far you get.
But it is a pressure line, because it's like climbing up, high up on the hill,
how you get them all pressure it gets harder and whatever else, but then there's the world for the
eventually. Because there's always the possibility of pleasure.
But going back to the pleasure that you know, but if you keep going, there will be a point of no return.
When you know, ah, you will not return, it's impossible for you to return to the pleasure
that you know.
And then as the super say, like the stone that has been split in half, you can never
ever make it one again, or like a dry leaf that came off the tree, it can never be green
again.
Oh, even like, you know, slightly more vivid examples of like, food you vomit it out,
it can not desire anything.
