I am actually special interested in that you said that I am, I am actually staying up to
as a background, but that is what I can't see usually, but when it appears, I am, actually
that's not the one that is very unhealthy, I am, the sense of self, it never appears
directly, because if it were to appear directly, then you can just say, ah, this is not myself
and that will be the end of it, but as in like in the sutras, the Buddha said, putujana
takes, with not self, he takes himself or with self, takes the not self or with self,
he takes the self, but he can never with not self, take the not self, which means whatever
putujana looks self will be there one way or the other, so that's why when people try
to apply the practice and say, ah, not, not, not myself, not myself to everything, that
doesn't work because it's just like a blanket attitude that you apply to everything,
but that means your sense of self is actually left out and doing that applying, so that's
why in the sutras it says, all the terminations are impermanent, all the terminations are
suffering, all things are not self, it doesn't say all things are impermanent, all things
are suffering, all things are not self, which is what most people do, they say ah, everything
is impermanent, everything is not myself, but it doesn't work like, I mean that's true,
it's not incorrect to say that, but it's not an open eye, it doesn't lead on, you won't
bring understanding of the Dharma, because the person needs to include himself into
his insight, and doing that is seeing that yourself, your sense of self depends upon
something that it's not yours, and when you see that yourself directly stands upon something
that is not yours, then automatically that sense of self is not yours either, so you don't
have to then ok, now I will say to myself, this is not myself, no, your experience then
is the experience of not self, if you see the terminations of that self as impermanent
and as suffering, so that's why I was saying like, it's not incorrect to say ah, nothing
is myself, yeah nothing can be yourself, but in terms of the practice it just doesn't
work, I mean it can work in terms of making people feel better, it's almost like a form
of denial, just saying everything is not myself, which is why it's more important to first
recognize that there is a sense of self, I can never see directly, I can never take it
out, I can never say this is not mine, you'll be finished with it, so you have to recognize
that it's there, and then affect your whole experience in your practice through seeing
the terminations, so then the whole experience will be experience of not self, but not just
selectively picking true, so everything needs to be affected, because although you might
not be able to pinpoint the sense of self, you know for sure that it's within the experience
as a whole, so if you're bent on the experience as a whole, you include it, that abandoning
includes the abandoning of the sense of self, so that was the whole, the whole talking
about the general background in particular intentions, because if you're just going
out particular intentions means you don't really see what's in the background, but then
if you don't even see what's in the background, you don't even know how to look for the background,
so whenever you look for the background, you look as if it's particular, you just make
it, make it actual, make it right in front of you, which means something else is a background
which means the sense of self is hiding somewhere else now, so you have to learn to be mindful
of the general background without already telling it and making it into particular, because
it's general, and if that's not general something else will be general, so learning to do that
means, ah, you start to notice more peripherally, without moving your vision left or right
top or down, you just start to include more in what you already seen, but if each time
you want to see something you keep moving around, you'll end up seeing only that, which
you move to, nothing around it, nothing more, so that was the whole point of that email
in the sense of I am. What did you mean that the intentional situation?
Well, even the general background is already intentional, obviously the intentions are
not as defined as they are particularly, but as I told you that before, a general situation
being in this room gives you a certain set of particular intentions as possibilities
that are allowable in this room, so for example if you go outside, you won't have a chance,
you won't be able to intend to use this water filter to drink water, because that's
in here, so your general situation has changed, so now, okay, drinking water is important,
so you start modifying your general situation so that particular intentions can arise where
you can get the water to drink, so it's not the intentions only come from you, like when
you think you're intending, the only reason you're able to intend is because your general
situation allows you those possibilities that now you're attending and they become
intentions, when you can't create anything in other words, you can't come up, because
if you come up with new things, an intention of a new thing is given from their general
background, so you can only use or choose between the given set of possibilities based
on the general situation, where you are, your abilities, and like body, and bodily predispositions,
height, strength, complexion, all of those are form and they partake and rather they
are fundamental form of general situation, because you know a short disabled person cannot
have intentions of running marathon, he might think about it, but for him it's inherently
removed from his fundamental situation that they're determined by his body, and so again
he can use different set, he can focus on different possibilities that arise and then
pursue those directions, but either way all he can do is kind of modify things that are
given beforehand, he can't create anything, and nobody can do anything that he's choosing
also based on his ability to give away thoughts, well yeah, like it's not that kind of your
choice is given for you, so there is responsibility for the choice, but the possibilities of your
choice are given beforehand, like when you choose between yes and no, well yes and
no are given beforehand as a form of choice, and then you choose one on the count of the
other, well it's basically your intentionality that it chooses, by attending the reason for
choosing yes, you choose yes, by attending the reason you choose no, you choose no, by
you know giving into the external pressure or whatever, various factors that affect your
choice, that's high works, so it's not you mean that it's because our hands still has
a choice, but he doesn't have the sense of self anymore, so basically sense of self interferes
and takes credit for these things that happen by himself, but it's important to first see
that and then take responsibility for the choice as if it is you who is choosing it, because
that's the only way you can actually through that abandon the sense of self, if you don't
see that and then immediately start saying well I haven't, I'm not doing anything, he's
just this body and everything, that's the denial, for protrusion and that's the denial,
so protrusion first has to admit that he is, that he's choosing, that he's responsible,
that there are results of his actions, that there is mother, there is father, there is killing,
there is giving life, there is all of that, like the mundane right view that Buddha talks
about, once he's able to admit that, to see that, then he can begin abandoning sense of
self through that, without abandoning that view, he abandones his sense of self based on
that, but usually people kind of take a shortcut and then they go straight into saying well everything
is not self, so nobody's doing any action anyway and so on and so forth, which is actually
similar to the wrong views of the Buddha's time that he was often discussing, when people
would say well there is no door, there is no Buddha bad, it's just elements and so on and
so forth, the reason why there is wrong is because there is a sense of self, it's a mistake,
but it's really as a mistake, so denying a mistake means you'll never be able to solve
the mistake, to correct it, to rectify it, because you denied, so first you have to admit
that there is a mistake and then you'll be able to fix it, well it's a misunderstanding
that, it's not misunderstanding that there is a modification, it's not misunderstanding
that there is an intention for modification, but a misunderstanding mistake is that it comes
from himself, that his self is the owner of it, he removes the ownership, all of those
things still stay, he's just the ownership is a confusion, thinking that it's me, it's
mine, I'm doing it.
It's very actually a different point, because I observe a choice, a or b, they are given,
but which one I chose, that was actually it appeared, that thought, exactly, but then
you are responsible for accepting that thought, as a decision, as a choice, so yes the thought
appeared, you didn't create it either, but you do choose, you do accept, to go with it,
or not go with it, just see what I mean, so even if the thought appears, you can't say
the choice has been made for me, no, you always make the choice, yeah, so by doing that,
by recognizing that, then you can disown yourself making the choice, not deny yourself making
the choice, there is a big difference there, and the difference is, in that order of things,
first you admit that there is a mistake, and then through the admittance of mistake, you
can rectify the mistake, well the second that denial is different, it's basically, you
see there is a mistake, and then you deny the mistake, say, ah, it's not mine, it doesn't
exist, it's all fixed already, not a problem, we are all in a barn or whatever, and then
you don't see the mistake anyway, you think you fixed it, but actually you just obscured
it.
So taking up responsibility for your choice, like really feeling responsible, like I am
doing this, I am choosing this, that is the first step, through that you can abandon sense
of I without abandoning responsibility for the action, and that's how you overcome the
action finally, but for as long as you are avoiding responsibility for it, you are avoiding
the nature of action, which means you are not overcoming the karma, the first accepting
that this is, I am, I am the choice, yeah, the choice is there, and there is a mistake
of ownership, but it's real as such, so you have to accept it, and then you'll be able
to fix it.
Well, the mistake is making the karma, which is why the decision remains bound to samsara,
so it's a real thing, if he finds out that it's a mistake, it ceases, so he's free,
but yeah, it's not just an illusion, or something like that, because samsara is real, and the
results of the samsara are very real, and the results of one's actions are very, very
real, I could even assert that sometimes people did a little thing that was wrong, but then
it resulted in a lot later on, so it's never guarantee, thinking well, be fine or not,
which means that responsibility is real, so for as long as the person doesn't admit
the mistake, the misunderstanding, misappropriation, he won't be able to fix it, so sometimes
people are too keen to fix it, so they quickly fall into denial of it, not self, not self,
not mine, not self, the science has proved nothing is self, nothing is mine, but they're
just obscures, that doesn't accept the responsibility, if you start saying to yourself,
not self, not mine, through the acceptance of that responsibility, and never abandoning
that responsibility, that's a different thing, but usually people do that, they say to
themselves, not self, in order to avoid the responsibility, because it feels like a fix,
but it's not, well, it's a temporary thing, which means it doesn't really work in a long
time.
How do disolving the accepted it is, it is I am the one, I am responsible for it?
Yeah, disolving, I mean I use that word, but it's not, it's not like, you don't do it,
oh, I don't own this anymore, you disobey it by seeing that you cannot own it in the first
place, by finding out that it's actually impossible to be owned, not knowing that it's impossible
to own something, just because you don't know that it's impossible, that's why you own
it.
So, finding out that actually, own or not, just makes no difference to the thing, it cannot
access it, cannot master, you cannot be the master of it, nor control it, automatically
you kind of, you stopped owning it, even if you say, oh, this is my book, this is my
chair, this is my phone, internally you don't own anything because you're sold through
the nature of it, and there was the case in the suit as well, when people focus on designations
and they think, oh, you shouldn't be saying mine or something, no, it's just a designation
and the Buddha said, that how that uses what I am, but for him, it doesn't mean anything,
certainly, it doesn't mean what it means for Patugian, so it's the same for mine and
belonging to me or whatever else, it's basically the internal connection, it's what matters,
like people can go around saying, not mine, not mine, yet hold tightly on to everything,
because they don't know the way out, another person might not pay any attention to what
he says, but internally he won't own anything.
I feel it's very interesting that the evening, in the case of Arabian, actually, everything
is going on from outside, no one can see it, because everything is the same way, but
he knows everything is not the case, only there's a difference, and some people think
they don't feel around, they don't feel, and they don't feel like it flies in the clouds
or whatever else, but no, again, you read the suit as an even the other Arab, and sometimes
you wouldn't be able to recognize another Arab, you would be a bit harder, the Buddha could
do it instantly, or some other monks would grade the powers, but generally, yeah, you
had to talk to the person, you had to see what their view was, that's what the Buddha
was saying, like, don't, don't ever leave anything unturned, like you should question, interrogate
each other, look for the meaning, if the meaning is not clear, press further, until the meaning
is clear, see where your understanding is, see what other monks understand, and that's
how both parties learn, if there is a genuine knowledge, that is being pushed further
further, not just the theoretical debate or something like that, but it's not just that
they were talking, but knowing each other's views, knowing where they are, they could tell,
oh, he's an Arab, or he is probably very soon going to be an Arab, or he's far from
an Arab, but if he makes enough effort, he will be one and so on and so forth.
It was very interesting, you said that a lot of many people think that we were born,
right at all here, to see, and to smell, and to taste, and even that is often not a reason,
actually, that's not really a reason, you're not born for anything, nor for nothing.
Just me saying this.
Yeah, the idea of purpose comes from already from that mistake.
I think the Buddha said a problem, a few occasions, but I remember one instance when he was
saying that because a person takes what it's not his, he makes use out of it, then he basically
owns what you become indebted to tomorrow, and then Mara can do whatever he wants.
So by using things that belong to Mara, you are in Mara's control, and then they ask
him what are those things, and he said it's the sight, sound and smell, taste, touch
as I know, all of the senses and sense bases are Mara's domain, which means they're
not used to begin with, your own eyes, they don't belong to you, they're there, they do
the purpose of looking or whatever else, but none of that obliges you to take them as
yours, only not knowing that they are not yours, you automatically take them as yours.
That's why even a newborn baby is already affected by a vision, although it didn't grow
out, it didn't develop designation of the structure, the mind structure and the mentality
intentional, it's already there, just waiting to develop.
Actually, all intentions are rising, actually they're like a want to hear, want to see.
Well, everything is intentional in that sense, yeah, it's just removing, or rather seeing
that the center of intention is not in you or mine, it's because things are already intentional.
That's the only reason intention can be there, but you have to see that through accepting
responsibility for your choices, for your intentions, not through denying it, or not in order
to deny it.
Actually, must think of the being, I think that everything or intention, everything is
actually arising.
Well, not everything, just whatever is present at the moment, like the present intentions
and present general situation, that's what's important, easy stops, thinking, oh, everything
is everything, is that all that means you're falling onto a view, that everything is intentional
and everything is like this, or everything is like that, and everything is not myself.
But that leaves a particular intention in general, in particular sort of order of things,
you don't see, because you're thinking about your view of everything and everything, you
see what I mean?
The difference is, your particular intentions and your particular situation should be your
foundation, not the view that everything is intentional and everything is not self.
So you can't think everything is intentional and everything is not self, if you're already
anchored in your present situation, like general situation, in particular, intentions to
think certain views, well, everything is starting, where you are just saying that everything
is starting.
The intentions are, I think, from general...
Intentions are...
Okay, that's simply, they're sort of channel directed by the general situation, then within
that you can have more particular intentions, but that's all because general situation is
still there.
If the general situation changes, the particular set of it, intention will have to change
as well.
I think that before we ask about the support of some people, even when they stay in the
temple, sometimes they get, like, not so whole, something important, how it arises
all day?
Well, when I say general situation, when I give a similar that slope, don't mistake that
for external circumstances.
It can be prompted by that, but it corresponds more correctly to moods that people are in.
Happy mood, sad mood, depressed mood, fearful mood, non fearful mood, the elated mood,
well, exactly, that's all the channeling, your intentions, your thoughts, your decisions,
you're in a bad mood, you don't like anybody that day, you're in a good mood, you like
everyone, you can get bad news, you want effect because you're in a good mood, but the
moods change.
The general situation you've rooted in changes, and when that changes, then your particular
response changes as well, so you have to learn, well, you have to start seeing the impermanence
of the moods, of the way that you mean that the general situation is where your mood
is.
That's what Harvey gave us talking about, he said that the designs, the more general mode
of being is a mood.
That's your first relationship with the world, mood, but when I say first, I mean structurally
first, not linear, not temporally first, doesn't mean 1, 2, 3, but your mood is at the
same time there when your particular intentions and actions are there, but it comes first
in terms of comes before, and that's already a form of relating with the world, interacting
with the world, because you're in a bad mood because of something, or you're in a good
mood, well, maybe because of nothing in particular, but it's still a form of relationship with
the world, which means that that mood, that situation you're in, will be determined
in your particular intentions, so you become mindful of that, you are mindful automatically
of whatever you do particularly, and in return, through developing that mindfulness, you
will be less and less affected by your own moods, and the less you're affected by
your own moods, the less of moods they are, supple some people at least, supple ten
people stay in the same situation, supple in the same trace, extremely, externally it
looks the same, but internally, their mood situation might be very different, they might
have different reasons there doing it, different motivation, it affects them differently, which
means their mood will be different, their minds will be at different stage, at different
level.
Yeah, being in a different way, not even just being in a different way, supple in the
temples, supple ten monks a year, but at least while they're doing something they
might not be having some, like, a wholesome thought, but the general situation is the same
in the temple, right?
Well, again, general situation is not the external circumstances of the temple, it's
the general situation of them wanting to be in the temple for various reasons that they
came to the temple.
So general situation, as much as particular situation for the mental is actually rooted
in you, in your actions, in your intentions, not in the world, obviously the monastery
will offer certain intentionality as well, things that are there amongst them, but again,
all of that is experienced internally, so you can't say, oh, they're all in the same
situation, why did they react differently?
They're not.
You're in your own situation, that's all you can know about, then you can see that somewhere
else is in a bad mood, or good mood, or in different mood, and you can say, ah, there
is a bad mood externally, there is a good mood externally, there is a depression externally,
there is a depression internally, if you're depressed or not.
So you can see these things, but again, it's all in relation to the mind, not in relation
to the things, not in relation to the objects of buildings or whatever else, how each person
reacts differently?
Well, the situation, the roots in situation, they can be experiencing the same things, but
if their mind is rooted in different mood, so to speak, they will be acting differently,
or they will be acting for different reasons, or they will be intending different things,
although it externally looks the same, it's done for different reasons, which means
it's a different thing.
So it's not necessarily that somebody is making also offerings, ah, he's a very nice
person, because he might be doing it for bad reasons.
Obviously, he still will have some benefit from making offerings anyhow, it's not ideal,
but it's better than not doing it, but if you really want to do it properly, you want
to make them and do it for the right reasons.
We would explain that the general situation means the praise, no see, when you say situation
means the place, you lead yourself out, and then you try to introduce yourself into
that situation, and see how can you react differently based on the same situation, but
That's a mistake because actually you can't separate yourself from the situation in the first place.
So when you say situation is the place, no. You have to say situation is me being in a certain place.
Always. You can't leave yourself out.
So me being in the monastery, you being in the monastery, can you be in the monastery?
Anybody being in the monastery, they have a thing that is in common to it, which is being in the monastery.
But the me part is different to all of us, because we came for different reasons.
It can be the same if we are here for the same reasons.
But you can't just focus on the place, because place without you is meaningless. It's not a move.
You mean that the situation means you mean that there is no place.
It means how you feel in a certain place, where your mind is in a certain place.
Generally. Then based on that, you will be making and doing particular actions and choices.
How do I feel?
It means even the five, six people a year, each person is feeling different.
Their situation has things in common. But it's not the same. It doesn't come from the world.
You can't say, are they all in the same place and they are different? No, they are not.
Their places correspond by having in common that they are all in the monastery.
But the internal aspect of it, me, my mood, my mind, my feelings, that's unique to all of the aggregates individually.
Which is why there is difference between individuals, even in terms of arrangements.
So you can't separate yourself and think that the place is the situation and then try to explain it to yourself back.
You are already there. Already connected.
Yes, you are part of it. You are inseparable from it.
It just wouldn't make any, it would be inconceivable to think you are part from it.
Unless it's based on a mistake.
It means that the mood, that is a general situation.
Yes, because the mood is, you know, I can be in a bad mood, but particularly I can be doing good things.
If I don't allow myself to be moved by my bad mood, generally the bad mood is there.
And it's kind of directing me, so I might be doing good things because I want to counter my bad mood.
It's still that's prompted by my bad mood.
So that that general slope is there and then I'm kind of going down it and choosing things.
So you can always choose wholesome on a kind of unwholesome.
Even if you are in the worst possible mood, there is never justification for unwholesome.
So then when the mood changes, your particular thing might change or might not, if you have enough wisdom.
If you develop enough wisdom to keep choosing wholesome over unwholesome, keep attending wholesome thoughts over unwholesome,
despite how you feel, how much pull you experience, how much bad influence you get from the world or whatever.
If you choose to do bad, it's because you chose to do bad.
You chose that to be the reason for your bad action or you chose that to be a good reason for your good action.
You're always responsible.
No matter how bad the mood is, you are always responsible, but it is important to start seeing it first.
Because if you don't see the general background of your mood, of the direction your mind is in,
you will not see a responsibility in regard to that.
You'll just be moved, so you have people who, when they're in the bad mood, they say things to be.
They say that when they offend people, they help people, then they feel bad afterwards.
When they kind of come out of the bad mood, they apologize, I'll never do that again.
Then they do it again.
Then your people, when they're in a good mood, they're so excited, ecstatic, they get a bit too much.
Then afterwards they feel a bit shameful off.
I've got to be carried away.
Because they're not aware of the general situation, of the general direction of their mood,
which means they're not being aware, they don't have a safeguard, so they're always taken by it.
And that's what the mindfulness is.
Before you explain that the mountain and that the shruff and that already included means that the mood,
that itself has a mood.
It's not something like...
No, no, no, the actual location.
So that is the reason that some people, even when they stay in the temple,
that their mood is not not good.
That's the reason.
They can be sitting by next to the Buddha and still.
Yeah, there were cases like in December of the Buddha, but they were just not.
The mind wouldn't be there.
And they say, well, you're wasting your opportunity.
But yeah, it doesn't necessarily mean that, like going to a place that the temple can't remind you,
oh, well, it can remind you if you were to know what you're supposed to do.
So if you were to know that you're supposed to be mindful of your moods
and take responsibility for your choices,
then going to a monastery or even the sutras can't remind you of that when you forget.
But if you don't know that in the first place, well, no amount of visits to the monastery
will make a difference because you can't be reminded of something that you don't know.
So you'll probably get different things than in the monastery.
And people will go for different reasons to a monastery, superstition or whatever.
Usually is a superstition, regardless of the religion as well.
But it's Buddhism or Christianity, so usually that's the reason why people go to churches and so on.
It's quite hard after to maintain mindfulness that with the thinking I would consider the background.
Well, because you're trying to maintain mindfulness in a particular sense,
you're trying to keep it in front of you.
But that's not mindfulness.
Mindfulness is knowing the background without interfering with it.
So if I ask you now, are you in a good or a bad mood, you will know the answer.
You might not be able to define it specifically, but you will know it's all right,
or no one more too good.
And that knowledge is already there.
It is not only to see the phrase, but not that, that it's a mood that I have to see.
Well, the fact that you can give me the answer to what your mood is at any time
means that knowledge is there at any time.
Or the superstition is important.
Yeah, so that's something you can be mindful of.
Only that is necessary to be mindful of, nothing else.
Before I remember, you said that I'm sitting in the cave,
could he and something, something?
You were explaining about the situation.
Is it increasing the mood or is it increasing?
I am sitting.
I am doing.
I am.
Means, yeah.
Means, basically, you are in such a such situation, which means your mood is there.
So is it important to see that I am sitting in the cave?
Is it important?
No, that was just the example I gave you as a more general situation.
Like, I am in the monastery now.
You can be mindful of that.
Or you can be mindful of, I am.
I am feeling elated now.
Or I am feeling depressed now.
Again, I can such a fatara so that when the Buddha refers to the mind,
he says, he knows mind, like literally for what it is.
He knows elated mind as elated mind.
He knows depressed mind as depressed mind.
Happy mind as happy, expanded mind, shrunk mind.
Like different shapes the mind can take.
He knows them.
But that's it.
So you're not trying to change it or whatever.
You just are. The mind is in that state, which means it will be affecting my particular choices.
So if the mind is in the pressed mood, you're mindful of it.
You will be more aware of the choices you make, which means you will not be making bad choices,
because you know that the mind will be trying to get you to make the bad choices,
because the mind is depressed.
In the same sense, when the mind is happy, you won't be overreaching in terms of your great choices,
because you know, the mind is elated, which means the perspective is a bit lost.
So you won't have the mind even, but like even another hand will practice mindfulness
in terms of the different shapes his mind will take.
It's just that he completely, completely saved any bond with that mind or with the body.
So whichever shape his mind takes, it doesn't affect him.
And so he's gone beyond.
But until that's the case, you need to keep that mind.
Because if you're only aware of mindful what's in front of you,
means you're not seeing your mind, because your mind is never in front of you.
It's always in the back.
Why do we see situations in front of you?
Well, if you're seeing situation in front of you, that's not your situation anymore.
Situation is where the mind is, which is always in the background.
Mood is where the mind is, which is always in the background.
But if you try to see it in front of you, it means whatever you're seeing in front of you is not the background.
Even if it was the background before, the faith that you put it in front means something else is now.
It means only has to keep seeing the mood, the mental state.
Well, you have to keep seeing the relationship between the two.
You have to keep seeing the mood, the mental state, and the relationship between your particular situation,
like particular choices you make.
Means this intention?
Means things I'm about to do based on how I feel.
To put it simply, yeah.
I feel bad, I feel neutral.
What am I doing right now?
Because whatever you do actually is rooted in how you feel.
Body-feeling?
No, there's no feelings, those are all perceptions.
Like, each is a perception.
You might dislike your reach.
So experience this pleasure in your mind on account of the body-lead.
But it's not that you're experiencing this pleasure in your body as a sensation.
No, that's just the perception of touch.
Pain is feeling, is it?
Pain is feeling, yes.
Pain is perception.
Yeah.
So each can be painful, or sometimes each can be pleasant, depending on whatever people are interested.
Pain, nothing you say, that I'm present.
Yeah, pain is I'm present.
Every feeling is mental.
And people misunderstand, they think, because when they say that, they're bodily feelings,
but he said their feelings caused in regard to the body.
So people misunderstand that and use that to explain sensation.
That's my bodily feeling.
No, it's not.
Every feeling is chetastic, it's a parallel.
It's mental.
So if it's in regard to the body, then it's called bodily feeling.
But it's still a mental feeling.
If it's in regard to the mind, then it's kind of doubly mental feeling.
But either if you're feeling being in regard to body, it's mental in itself.
So as I said, when you have a bodily itch, bodily discomfort,
you will most likely experience mentally, unpleasant feeling.
But it's not that unpleasant feeling is in your leg.
It's a very sharp sensation of severed leg, and a kind of almost unbearable pain mentally.
But if you're mentally free from that pain, that discomfort ceases to cause you suffering.
So that's why I like the arrangements were the minds developed in terms of genres,
and they could bear a lot of physical discomfort.
It wouldn't be discomfort for them.
It's just the way the mind relates to it.
When the Buddha asked Mahakasava said, you're very old now, you've done what is to be done.
Why don't you come with me?
I get lots of offerings.
I get silk robes, staying in these palaces.
So you can come and stay with me because there's no need for you to be living rough in the forest.
And he said, oh, there's no need, Lord, because whoever can obtain genres it will.
Like these reg ropes and these forests will feel like the softest, highest, most pleasant dwellings and abiding.
Because that's how it feels to the mind that it's trained in genres.
And then another case when the Buddha was instructing a very long rule of it,
when he said, develop genres so that the hemp robes you're wearing will feel like silk.
Develop genres so that the sleeping under the root of tree will feel like sleeping in a plastered palace.
And then develop genres so that the rough hemp robes, like unclean rice you eat,
would feel like the softest rice with the nicest caries.
And then it was for medicine and so on.
Saying basically that the mind state, the mind development will determine your relationship with your body.
So the body is going through discomfort.
Well, whether usually discomfort is associated with pain, mental pain.
So if there is no discomfort, there is no pain.
Associated with mental pain?
Yeah, experiencing suffering in regard to discomfort.
Everybody dislikes discomfort.
But if you develop your mind means less and less things will be discomfortable to you.
I'm comfortable.
I'm comfortable.
How do they have unpleasant feelings?
They do. Yeah, taking stuff.
So arahant can be an arahant without being mastered all of the genres.
So that's why you had arahants who were in great pain physically experiencing sharp piercings,
sensations, piercings, perceptions on a counter grid.
But they were not suffering internally.
There was no duke.
But it's just that their relationship with the body was kind of unbearable and pointless.
Because they were arahants.
They had no reason to endure all of those sharp discomfort.
But discomfort in itself is not actually painful.
It's the mental resistance in regard to it that makes you suffer on account of discomfort.
It makes you fear discomfort.
It makes you really work hard to not experience discomfort.
I mean, how do they feel unpleasant feelings but no suffering?
Well, I would be speaking.
Like you can't say that because if you say for protrusion that he feels unpleasant feelings,
you can't use the same designation for an arahant.
Because from protrusion point of view, arahant doesn't have any feelings anymore.
He has overcome them.
And the fact that he doesn't feel anything anymore, that's what's pleasant for him.
And that's what the Sariputu said.
So you have to distinguish the bodily discomfort from pain, from displeasure, from duke.
Because being able to bear this discomfort, that's why sometimes it's necessary.
That's why for some people a satis is a woodwork.
It will make them see things rightly, not for everyone, but for some people it would.
Which is why the Buddha said, well, if you agreed aversion and delusion decreases
while doing a satis practices, then do it.
If it's not decreasing, then don't do it.
But yes, some people do need to go through discomfort in order to start to see the difference.
The discomfort is not automatically a pain.
It's your mental resistance that makes yourself and makes you confuse it.
So by overcoming that, you overcome discomfort and then you don't fear it.
And as the Buddha did, he was the Buddha.
So he didn't have to pursue discomfort anymore, what for?
Either way, he was not affected by it.
So he would just go wherever he was.
Sometimes he would sleep on a stack of hay, under the tree.
Sometimes he would sleep in a king's palace, if that's where he was at the time,
going behind it or whatever else.
So it's not the external things will determine necessarily what it's good or bad.
It's basically your attitude in regard to it.
But sometimes people can go and live roughly in the forest and under the root of tree
for completely wrong reasons.
They don't see this difference, they address torture in themselves and thinking
the true torture, they will be developing purification and strength.
But they want, they have developed endurance, but misguided endurance.
So the endurance has to be ruined to the right view.
Well, anything has to be ruined to the right view, you know, to be right.
Which is why a person shouldn't go to a forest and start experiencing themselves
unless it's a sort of a, unless he has genres, unless other establishments have been made,
as the Buddha said.
So you just end up doing it for unwholesome reasons.
And your answer is actually very difficult point under some,
because sometimes I feel that because of a self view that's try to go against,
like try to change the teams.
That is actually based on the self view that they're going to see.
Well, like again, even if it is based on the self view, it's really less such.
So if you have a thought of wanting to change things, that's something you include in your mindfulness.
Even if it came from yourself, from the mistake of yourself or not,
it's real as such. It's there. You just experienced it.
It's your mindful of that.
So you don't divide out this came from this. That's okay.
It's came from another one. No.
Whatever your experience, it's real as that experience.
Even if it's an abstract experience of something that you've never seen,
they start to, you're experienced it in your mind as such,
and it's real in that way.
So if you're having resistance in regard to endurance,
that's part of the endurance.
If you have thoughts of resisting this,
that's all result of you enduring.
So you're just included in endurance.
Are not they endurance?
Are not can endure.
But Argo wants to suffer on account of his endurance.
He won't fear the endurance.
He won't try to avoid it.
If he comes, he comes. If he doesn't, he doesn't.
He won't try to avoid it, but he won't go after it either.
Because he has no need for it.
For puttu, you know, this is enduring sometimes,
that the suffering that you've been involved in.
Again, it needs to be done for the whole some reasons.
Like puttu, you know, I can endure a lot.
You know, there are people setting yourself on fire,
complete misguided puttu,
it's for ridiculous political reasons.
Like how dumb is that?
Complete misguided.
Yet it's extreme for endurance and people do it.
And that means nothing.
But if somebody would endure very little for the right reasons,
he would reap much more benefit.
So if you endure, because the endurance has a reason,
because you don't go after it,
nor do you run away from it,
nor do you do anything on account of it,
that's already more awesome.
Then you can know endurance for what it is,
or lack of it for what it is,
or need of development for what it is.
You won't be running away from it,
because sometimes people get really into enduring
as a form of running away from it.
I fear this, so I'm going to go and face it,
because I'm terrified of it.
And then they end up torturing themselves
as if that will kind of make them overcome the fear.
If there is any wisdom in regard to it,
it might help them,
like putting themselves through rough situations,
it might help them,
if there is a wisdom basis.
But if there isn't,
it will just make them overcome around the same issue.
Something actually even fail.
Even fail, we don't do anything.
Automatically,
all these stuff moving,
and sometimes it's quite interesting,
sometimes it's just sitting,
and not thinking to the anything.
Automatically, all these stuff moving,
they're doing, they're thinking.
Yeah, exactly.
I would have said,
you know, it's all happening,
but it's something ready to begin to be one.
Well, it's basically, as I said,
the body doesn't need self-tooperate.
Intentions don't need self-tooperate.
So they've been operating on their own
before, for protruding now,
or after, for an around.
The problem is,
protruding first needs to accept the responsibility for yourself,
which is done through developing mindfulness
in regard to body and whatever else.
Actions, choices, specifically.
And then, through accepting the responsibility,
you can eventually reach the point
when you just see, oh yeah,
the intentionality doesn't require sense of self.
It's all operating.
But if you start doing it before,
you fully accept responsibility,
then it will more,
be like, more forgetfulness.
You forgot to be mindful,
and yeah, the body is just doing things.
But that's all rooted in our awesome,
because of the self-view.
So, other hands,
forgetfulness, so to speak,
is different from the forget,
like, other hands, forgetfulness,
will not induce self-view,
will not induce a region,
which means, basically,
it's not really forgetfulness.
But for protruding,
and with yeast, forgetfulness,
you forget all the way.
Yeah, I know.
And that's how the region,
ignorance,
is maintained.
I am fully, fully,
I got just simply,
it was not...
Well, so to speak,
but the thing is,
like, if you are forgetfulness,
it's not inducing a region.
I mean, you are mindful
of you being forgetful.
So, you might be forgetful
in terms of particular things,
or I forgot the number,
or something,
but I didn't forget the nature of forgetting.
I'm mindful of that.
That's why the garhant mindfulness
is so fully developed.
And he can't stop doing it.
So, to speak, he's always mindful
in that sense.
But he's not always mindful
in a sense of contemporary repersonal
like touching, moving,
moving like a rover.
No, means he can't forget,
he's forgetfulness.
Forgetfulness will not induce
a region anymore for him.
So, you might hear
forget particular things,
as an experience of forgetting,
of forgetting,
he's mindful of that.
And that same cannot be said
for protruding.
Okay, sometimes even if I'm not mindful,
everything is going well.
Yeah.
Whether you're mindful
or not, things are intentional
and they are going.
The thing is,
you do have to accept responsibility for it.
Like, that's why the,
that's why the situation of protrusion
is kind of perilous.
In a way,
you're not in control of everything,
or of anything,
but in the same way,
you're responsible for everything.
So, you can't control anything,
but you have full responsibility
for all of it.
And it's true.
Because protrusion,
you might say,
oh well, I'm not doing this
and it's just my body.
The fact is,
when he dies, he'll be reborn again
because he's protrusioned
and because of the actions,
even if my body just made these actions,
you will be experiencing those results
because you took that body to be yours.
So, in that sense,
he needs to fully accept
his responsibility
even for accidents,
even for things that are not
in his control clear.
And you're fully accepting
the responsibility
he can eventually overcome,
but not before.
Again,
that's why the mundane
right view comes first,
like admitting.
Are you only,
he needs free from karma,
or is free from karma?
Yeah, well,
Arya has a limited life.
Really, very good.
So, the sort of money
is free from karma?
Well, relatively.
Ultimately,
yes, within seven,
at most,
but he'll be done,
but he still has
kind of the wheel
didn't quite stop spinning yet.
But he will.
He does serve you
this karma.
Sorry?
Without serve view,
that they have no
no serve view,
even sort of money,
they don't believe in servo.
Yeah, but they still have
residues of conceit.
Conceit, I am.
Yeah, they don't have
a self-view in terms of thinking
themselves as living
like an independent
master of five aggregates.
They don't have that anymore.
But they still have
conceit in sense of I am,
and they still have degree
of greedy version of delusion,
because of which
they will be evolving
a bit longer,
until they make enough effort,
whether in this life or,
but someone
doesn't necessarily
have to be born
seven times.
He can become
out of his second
lifetime,
or third,
or fourth or fifth,
at most,
seven.
Yeah.
For me,
very difficult
on this end of the first
section,
it's very difficult
to have a whole path.
Perception means
a lot like a helping
knowledge to arise.
No, I think something like a
perception means
perceiving.
It means things that are
right.
In the case of pain,
the user pain is feeling.
Yeah.
Perception means
the user there like
I am.
Well, what is causing the pain?
There is, you can't
Well, not necessarily the
cause of pain,
but basically perception
and feeling are inseparable.
You can't just
perceive or just feel.
Whenever you feel,
you're perceiving
something.
Whenever you're perceiving
something,
you're feeling something.
So, if you say,
I have feeling of pain,
well, there is a perception
in regard to it.
Usually,
it's what causes your pain.
Hmm.
Suppose if I
that's a fire.
Well, that's a sharp,
piercing perception.
That's it.
That you don't want to endure.
But that's not necessarily pain.
Hmm.
If somebody tells you,
if you touch this fire,
how will, I don't know,
save 500 dying children
and you're going to touch the fire
and you'll be very happy
that you've done it.
Cause you know,
you save 500 lives.
Hmm.
So, you won't be suffering
on a kind of touching the fire.
Hmm.
But if you want,
I don't know,
if you're a painter
and you're part of your painting
and then you burn your hand
and you can't paint,
you can't earn any more,
your family suffering,
you'll be suffering a lot
on a kind of touching the fire.
Fire.
It's the same perception,
touching the fire.
Oh, because it's telling you
that the touching the fire.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's a bodily perception.
You perception of touch.
Hmm.
You see,
seeing something disagreeable.
Yeah.
Like you can see something disagreeable
or agreeable.
But you don't have to neither suffer
nor be happy on a kind of it.
But usually people are.
Oh.
I see something agreeable.
I like it.
I want more of it.
You get very related.
You see something disagreeable
who I don't want to look at it.
I don't like it.
Hmm.
And if you have no choice
but to look at it,
you'll start suffering.
I think that if I,
if I call it pain,
it becomes different.
Because I write a body of pain.
But actually,
it's just unpleasant.
That's why,
you know,
if you don't like it,
you'll start suffering.
I think that if I,
that's why I was telling you,
when you told me that,
how getting rid of the bodily pains
or whatever I said,
well, that's irrelevant,
in a way.
Hmm.
There is nothing to do
to the nature of suffering,
to do it.
I go,
I have a pain in my right arm.
Well, first of all,
it's not in your right arm.
It's discomfort in your right arm.
On a counter,
which your mind is bothered.
But if you think the pain is in your right arm,
then fixing your right arm,
will feel like you fixed your pain.
Which means you're actually trying
to fix your dukkha
at a completely wrong domain.
You're trying to,
and lots of meditation
that people teach
is about that,
or observing the sensations
and feeling your body like this,
and if it feels tight,
you lose it.
It's actually relevant
in every possible way.
How do you see that,
what's the reason?
Where am I?
Where am I supposed to make it?
It could not be more.
I, I, I think,
before.
Yeah, it could not be more.
It's guided.
It's completely misprojected.
It's exactly what I'm saying just now.
Like, you, you, you, you're looking
at a completely wrong place
for a solution to the problem of suffering.
Many people believe
going to Arhant or whatever.
Well, yeah.
People believe in various things.
The reason why,
why people feel it works,
is because
most of people they do it,
are lay people with very busy lives,
and then,
you never really stop,
you never really reflect,
you don't really have any right views,
so then you go to a place
of an intensive retreat,
controlled retreat,
but every moment,
it's kind of tacky,
tacky, tacky,
you do this,
you do this,
you do this, you watch,
you watch,
and it almost feels like a release.
But the release comes from the novelty,
from this new kind of compressed thing,
that then brings out the release.
But it's nothing to do with wisdom.
A key few develop wisdom in regard to it.
It will not be on account of going as techniques.
It will be on account of you
practicing understanding,
trying to understand,
trying to find out
what understanding means.
And when you do,
you realize you don't have to do going.
Well, not more than go out,
by yourself,
and start sweeping trees,
or carry bricks,
if you want.
P.T. is like a feeding,
feelings in power,
to keep all the loving,
and to go in,
and let this look in.
Yeah, it's all based on the body.
Based on the body.
Yeah, you observe bodily sensations,
which is ordered,
your contradiction in terms.
You don't feel your body.
You perceive it.
You can experience feelings in your mind,
in regard to what body is going through,
especially if you're
identifying with your body,
your material form,
you're suffering more than.
But again,
any suffering that happens,
or not,
happens on the level of mind,
not on the body.
So then removing a particular knee pain,
it's playing ridiculous,
when it comes to understanding the nature of suffering.
Like, why would this be relevant in any way?
Yeah, just stretch your knee, if it hurts.
That's the end of it.
Well, I'm concentrating on the method
that only one thing is,
this body is changing.
This encounter is really ticker.
Well, yeah,
they say the body is changing
in that sense,
it's constantly changing,
like a constant flow.
But that's not true,
because it's changing on one level,
but on another level,
it's still the same body.
Because if the body is constantly changing,
every second becoming different body,
you wouldn't be able to refer to it as the body.
You wouldn't be able to use the same designation for it.
But the fact that you can say it's still the same body,
means that change that the Buddha talks about
is slightly more complex than just saying it's all impermanent.
And modern science has proven
that atoms and electrons are constantly changing,
so everything is in a constant change.
If everything is constantly changing,
there is no change at all.
Because in order for change to be perceived,
there has to be a part that's not changing.
Otherwise, you can't say it's changing.
There is no reference point.
So saying the body is constantly changing
is a contradiction in terms,
or a wrong view.
Because it's changing on one level
while still remaining the same.
So, all myoko is the same myoko.
There was young myoko.
Obviously, there is a difference.
The body, you know,
grew bigger, got older and so on.
But it's still the same body.
So change, or rather, is in a way called invariant,
under transformation,
or means persisting while changing,
persisting the same,
while it's changing on another level.
No, no, no, no, no.
He was looking at the hand,
holding the pen,
and something,
is it the same or different?
Is it the same or the thing
he was speaking about,
is it changing in form or something?
Well, I don't really remember that context,
but I think...
Is it, like,
he was looking at the pen,
that he was holding the pen in his hand,
and is it that, like,
the same or different?
I remember,
when a barber,
he explained the like,
that the ship,
that there's some part over the ship,
that the gradually replacing,
and is it the same ship for another?
Is it...
I see what you mean.
No, that was slightly different though.
I think there was a different context.
Now, I was talking about the pen,
it was about the intention
to run the letter,
intention to go with the meaning and so on,
but in a way,
that's what I was telling you,
maybe last week,
I don't know what it was,
when I said,
when you designate a thing,
that designation is part of a thing.
So, when you refer to something as a ship,
you designate certain collection
of things as a ship.
So,
sometimes you can change parts so much,
that it becomes a different ship.
But if your designation was on the level of A ship,
means it still stayed the same,
because although it's all different parts,
it's still a ship.
Obviously, if you start putting car parts on your ship,
and then you turn it into a car,
you can't say it's a ship anymore.
It means off,
it's a car now,
so it has changed.
But that change is external.
That change has nothing to do with the impermanence of the terminations,
that the Buddha is talking about.
Sabres and Karna Nietzsche is nothing to do with them,
because this is just something you observe with your senses.
Oh, yeah, the curtains have faded,
the door is broken.
It's irrelevant.
What is not irrelevant is you move in regard to it,
your feelings in regard to that.
So, if that door was a very important door,
given to you by very important person handcrafted,
it would be a very valuable door,
and if it gets broken,
you suffer because the whole significance is affected by it.
It means you were attached to it in a way,
but saying that the door is constantly changing
makes no difference to the fact that it is significant
and it means a lot to me.
So, whether it's changing or not,
the significance of the door or of any object that you are attached to,
it remains unaffected.
So, you can be trying to repeat,
it's all changing, it's all changing.
Still, it means a lot to you.
And by saying it's all changing, it's all changing,
you're basically trying to deny the fact
that it means a lot to you.
Instead of taking responsibility,
that it means a lot to you.
And through accepting responsibility for different amounts of meanings,
so to speak, different significance,
like, I don't care much about this sheet,
but I care about the water filter,
because it's more important to me.
And that's normal.
It's different levels of intentionality.
But me, trying to deny all of that,
thinking that's the escape from it,
but it's not.
The escape is first step is to admit that the things that mean differently to you.
Sometimes something means more,
sometimes it means less.
What you want to accept that responsibility for the difference significance
and then overcome it,
or rather, becomes stronger
than the strongest significance you're experiencing in the world.
You're feminine, usually.
That's something like everybody's usually attached.
You can't help but being attached to your family, to your children.
So you don't want to deny it.
You can't deny it,
but you won't free you from the attachment.
It will just cause denial, saying,
that's not really my child.
It's constantly changing, everything is constantly changing.
No, it's your child.
And he's changing while remaining your child.
That's how things work.
So you want to be able to fully accept responsibility
for that being your child,
for all the feelings you have,
fully accept responsibility,
and then become stronger than that responsibility.
So when that child is taken away from you,
one way or the other,
your mind will not go with it.
No, through denying that that was your child,
but through becoming stronger,
than any significance you can gather from the world.
Because stronger, isn't it?
It means not being moved by it.
So if this door is very important to me,
it was a gift made, whatever,
I acknowledge all that,
and I fully accept that,
and fully responsibility.
And yeah, if somebody asks,
does this door mean more than that broom?
I would say yes.
It's more important,
and it was a gift by a good friend or whatever else.
He made it especially for me,
and my God's welfare.
And that's it's really such.
So there's no point,
there's no reason to deny that.
Unless I believe the denial of that
would free me from my attachment to it.
But he won't.
In order to free myself from the attachment
of the important external object,
he's through overcoming the significance of the external object
without denying it.
So you have to admit that it's important,
and then become more stronger than that importance.
So when the importance is taken away,
when the thing that is important is taken away,
you are not affected.
So as the mundane right view,
say to repeat again,
there is mother,
there is father.
It doesn't go around saying,
oh no, it's just collection of atoms,
and everything is constantly changing.
There is no mother,
there is no father, there is nothing.
And that's what Gwankha said.
Which means Gwankha is not even a mundane right view.
And he was just one of them,
really.
There's so many,
like saying the same basically.
To become stronger,
to overcome the needs of understanding.
And understanding what,
and understanding for myself?
Understanding that actually,
no matter how important to you is,
it was inaccessible to you from the beginning.
You could have not owned it from the start.
The only reason you owned it,
the only reason you were attached to it
is because you didn't know that it's impossible to own it.
When you know it's impossible to own,
it's like a relief.
And then, yeah,
it's an important though.
But it doesn't mean that I'll suffer if I lose it.
No, it doesn't mean that I will be all carried away
if I get another one.
Suppose that's meant to child in that case,
that you understand,
not mine,
it means actually how to understand it,
it was separate.
Well, again, first you have to accept it as yours,
accept full responsibility for it,
for all the feelings you had.
And then, but becoming stronger than that,
you can experience,
well, a form of disson.
So, you're not denying the significance of a child,
or significance of a parent,
or a mother or father,
but means you develop yourself further than that significance.
So, when the significant object disappears,
eventually,
means you won't be taken by it.
And the reason, again,
why Anitcha from the Sutras is different
than Anitcha has been taught,
as taught in the Sutras,
by going out of it,
because you don't actually have to wait for things to cease.
You don't have to see the ending in order to see Anitcha.
You know them that they are impermanent,
while they are impermanent.
Because they are impermanent.
That's it.
Why they are impermanent?
Because they have a reason on their own.
It's difficult point,
and it's a different point.
Because usually, see this tree got destroyed.
Everything is impermanent.
No, actually,
when you're experiencing right there,
there is the positive experience
of a destruction of a tree.
And that's a present experience,
which means, actually,
nothing can cease,
there is another experience right there.
But if you are concerned about the things in the world,
as fundamental,
then yes, the destruction of the tree will mean impermanence.
But it doesn't.
The impermanence from the Sutras refers to the impermanence,
impermanent nature of your experience,
of your five aggregates.
But unless,
the moment when you die,
you won't experience the ending,
which means, a nature from the Sutras
is different than a nature that you can observe in your senses.
And it is different,
because if you weren't,
you wouldn't need a bullet to teach on each and another.
You could just see it yourself,
with your eyes,
or here with your ears.
Oh, yes, it's impermanent.
I saw it.
Because when you see a destruction of a house,
again,
experience of seeing a destruction of a house
has a reason,
which means there's no impermanence there.
It's on the relative impermanence
of a certain house changing its shape,
from being a useful or in-shape useful for inhabiting.
Now it's a less useful shape of a pile of rubble.
It's still something you're perceiving,
so you just perceive a different perception
that you externally explain to yourself as change.
Just see what I mean.
No, no.
You can ask a question there.
You said this is what has arisen with it.
It is impermanent.
I actually don't understand.
Again, let's take the example of a house.
You look at the house.
You have the experience of seeing a house.
Experience as a whole.
We're not just talking about a house,
because it's never just a house.
You are always in every situation.
Even when you think about the situation,
that you are not present in,
you are present in your thoughts.
Mentally, that's your situation.
So you cannot leave yourself out.
Which means there is no objective scientific world
everybody talks about.
The only world you know is the one you can perceive.
So when you look at a house,
that's the experience of seeing a house.
Now, somebody starts destroying a house.
That's the experience of seeing a house being destroyed.
It's another experience.
Impermanence that the Buddha talks about
pertains to the experience of any kind.
Not of the specific house,
a tree or a child.
Experience in itself is impermanent.
Because it has a reason on its own.
So basically when you are experiencing the perception of the house,
your experience is known as impermanent.
As a result of that,
any ownership that you have to your house,
will disappear even in that house and remain standing.
So destroying the house,
setting it on fire,
makes no difference to the internal impermanence.
Nothing to do because it's another experience.
Are there?
Sometimes having a house being destroyed
can possibly remind you of
if you already know it first,
not if you don't know it.
That actually it was impermanent to begin with.
It was impermanent while it was still standing.
And look, now it's being destroyed.
Of course, it was always impermanent.
Subject to destruction means it can be destroyed.
It will be destroyed.
It doesn't mean necessarily it's being destroyed while I'm staring at it.
Do you see the difference here?
Yeah, actually,
this is where the house is implemented or not.
If I don't have experience with that,
there's no any problem with people.
So the only reason people use
that they say western science
so they say everything is impermanent.
Just observe sensations.
Everything is constantly changing.
It's basically to deny
the responsibility for it,
believing that's the escape.
But it's not.
It's a completely wrong direction.
If you want a escape,
you first want to admit that the thing
means something to you or not.
And then without abandoning that responsibility,
or not.
And you don't have to witness
or have it destroyed in order to prove to yourself
that it was impermanent.
Meaning, if you needed to prove to yourself externally,
it means you were never sure about it internal,
which means there is no knowledge.
Hmm.
Why would the thought fall to all the body?
It didn't.
It didn't.
No.
Never like that.
He would say you observe parts of the body,
like lungs or whatever,
like all of the context of my body,
my strong healthy body.
So to experience this past,
this passion in regard to that body.
If you just think of a parallel lung,
it's quite disgusting.
And then parallel lung,
that's exactly what I have in me.
If you think about intestines,
and it's skin, hair,
think about that,
it will make you experience this passion.
Because it's not beautiful.
He didn't teach sweet associations
and being aware of your kneecap,
or whatever else.
No, it was a contemplation of bringing those things to mind
so to experience this passion.
You're doing long enough,
then even when you don't have those things in your mind,
just being aware of your body will be seen
as those healthy things.
Hmm.
It's very interesting.
I think many people write an entire diver,
and many people write a body contemplation,
and write that body.
Yeah, that's what I have done.
It's for that reason.
Because usually people don't think about death,
don't want to think about death, don't see death.
So seeing a dead body
or things of their nature
will all remind you.
I cannot escape this.
This will happen to me.
So you experience this passion towards your life,
towards life of others,
towards you realize, oh,
it will all end like this.
It's a reminder of something
that kind of everybody knows
in the back of their mind.
Obviously, it's not, again,
there is no wisdom.
People can go bit funny in regard to it,
because it can be too much of a shock or something,
and then they can go mad
as they did in the suitors,
and they really practiced
hard contemplation of death.
The Buddha went out for the retreat.
Obviously, they came back as like
maybe half of the monks left.
So what happened to the rest of the world?
They were jumping off the cliffs and stuff,
because they were,
and he said, okay, well, in that case,
practice mindfulness of breathing.
They have one result
in such extreme actions.
Obviously, if somebody does
Maranusati correctly,
they can become Maran very quickly.
Because it's a fairer,
direct, forceful, dispassion.
Mad.
Yeah, I did it.
It's very interesting.
Attachment of the child also,
it means that it's experience.
Yeah, it's real.
It's real as such.
People think they can deal with attachment
by denying it, by saying, well,
it's not really, it's just atoms,
it's molecule.
So I don't need to see, like,
the child's body is changing.
No, it's irrelevant.
You have to accept the responsibility
for your feelings. You must not deny it.
You have to accept
the weight, the significance
of having your child.
And that's how you can overcome.
And that experience is important.
Yeah.
That's what impermanence pretends to.
Experience is important.
It means it's changing.
No, it means it will come to rent.
Even if you don't see it in the server.
That's very important.
You have to accept it in the server.
As the server said,
whatever has the nature of rising
has the nature of ceasing.
Even if you're not witnessing the ceasing,
just in its nature,
it will be affected by ceasing.
It will cease.
It will come to rent.
Why? Because it has a reason.
Because its nature has manifested.
For that reason,
it will have to go.
Nothing else.
No, because molecules are changing.
No, because somebody can come and destroy it.
Just because it has appeared.
Is there any...
Is there any nibbana in common?
Is it true?
No.
No.
Because permanent nibbana doesn't apply
to nibbana.
Because nibbana cannot even be dead.
Any designations?
Applied to things.
Any bana means surpassing all that.
It doesn't make sense.
And there is that, I think...
It's true.
True available.
When Bikuni,
Damodino was answering the questions
of her ex-husband.
And he was asking,
where does this lead?
And they came to a point that
well, that leads to nibbana.
Well, where does nibbana lead?
What's nibbana is?
Well, the point of your questioning
cannot be applied to nibbana.
That's any answer I give you won't make any sense.
Or it could be completely misspecived.
And is there any kind of decision?
The least of 32 designations
for nibbana, like, describing another shore?
All right.
Definitely.
Niche.
Permanent.
Well, I guess I have read that sort of.
But if you mean in terms of nibbana,
the other shore,
is the definition of
greater version of illusion,
free from bondage,
whatever else.
And if you say in that sense,
as here you could just talk about this,
I can see that if you say in that sense,
or it's permanent,
from the point of view of the impermanent that you're living in,
then yeah.
But you can't say it's permanent in last forever.
Because if something,
usually if people say permanent,
they mean eternal.
Permanent in eternal.
Eternal means basically
when things are taken as self,
it will last forever.
And that's usually the sense of permanence.
Like a soul or something.
So if somebody said nibbana is permanent,
by quoting this sutra,
that's okay. But then it should be clarified
that it's in the context
from the point of view of the impermanent.
But if they say nibbana is permanent,
means once you enter it,
it lasts forever. That makes no sense.
Because the idea of lasting and time
cannot pertain to timeless nibbana.
So permanent as pertaining,
referring to time,
usually cannot pertain to the timeless nibbana.
It doesn't make sense.
Unless you use it as evidence
to describe it,
in which case you should probably clarify it as such.
It's not right to say it.
Sansa or it's permanent
only based on determination that it's self.
Again, it's not permanent.
It's just that
it's going to be occurring
for as long as you don't see
the nature of it and escape it.
But then, again,
saying permanent or impermanent
cannot really designate that correctly.
Unless you're using to inspire somebody
to say them, yeah, from your point of view
of this soul impermanence,
this is the permanent, this is the stable,
from suffering, sure.
But in terms of, if you use permanent
as a designation of time
last forever,
it doesn't work like that.
What has arisen
it is impermanent.
It is just a raw nature.
It just must understand it.
What has arisen
that they experience?
It is impermanent.
But sometimes, because
the user, we don't see the beginning
at the end, it's quite
different to receive it.
You know, to see that correctly,
what is arisen is impermanent,
because the arisen first
you have to accept it,
and what is arisen is real.
Even if it's a fantasy in your thoughts,
it's really a search,
and then you have to accept
responsibility for it.
And then, through that,
it's interesting by itself.
But if, kind of,
catch up, and try to do it
before,
basically means you'll be,
it will become a part of the narrative.
I think that the only,
only way to show the
impermanence is clear.
It supports, like, two Christian people
who never accept Dharma,
they have a Buddhism.
For them, what we can do,
is to prove the experience,
just to think,
impermanence is quite different
to the experience,
but attention changes.
That's the only way
to explain impermanence.
Well, I don't think they'll get it like that.
First, they have to be willing
to follow,
not just Christians,
or wherever you're talking,
even Buddhists actually.
Because if they think they already know it,
whatever you say,
will fall on their fears.
So, saying everything is changing
will be okay, so what?
I think it's closer,
probably, to say, well,
the fact that you will die,
the fact that you don't really know what's after your life,
you can't be sure.
Do you really want to spend your life
based on the mere belief,
and mere faith,
in an imaginary friend,
or something like that?
You cannot verify.
The God exists as such,
the heaven exists as such,
the Jesus exists as such.
You'll be saved for sure.
How can you be sure?
Even if you do everything rightly
for the rest of your life,
as the Jesus prescribed,
or whoever, in the Bible,
you still cannot be 100% sure
that then will be the outcome.
So, your entire life,
all of your actions,
are rooted in faith,
in just blind faith,
and that's why it's unwholesome.
If someone is suffering,
suffering from sickness,
like a terminal,
then if they ask us,
how to be free from suffering,
in the case of Putu,
generally,
it might be a bit late for them at that point.
If we just tell them
that the things have arisen,
it is important.
If they've been practicing throughout their life,
then, yeah, you could remind them
of the dharma in the Sultansan,
but if they haven't,
you can't say anything.
It's very difficult point
that you've been in the Lanyana,
but it is for the name, sickness.
So, the pain that depends on someone
is really serious and sick.
Because pain is everything.
Well, the most you can say
to a person who never practice
and the most of the death is
life.
Provided they were good things that they've done.
If they haven't well,
then try to think
good things now,
but they might be a bit late,
but obviously.
When I'm sick,
doesn't mean I observe.
I can see as relief with attention,
definitely changes.
All the time, we never think about the pain.
Pain is present all the time,
but we are thinking about many other things.
We are thinking about the object
and the only thing that's going to
understand the impermanence.
No, no, no.
As I said,
you don't have to keep witnessing the change
to understand impermanence.
You have to recognize
independent arising of things,
arising on their own
in order to recognize impermanence.
They're not impermanence
because they're not impermanent
because they're going to come to an end.
In the first place.
So they will have to come to an end.
Not to come to an end.
So you start worrying about cessation of things,
start looking in their arising.
If they have a reason,
you have no say in it.
You have no say in arising of your thoughts.
You have some say in what you're going to attend,
once it has a reason.
But the fact that
it will always arise on its own.
I heard that Feng Anaman Yanemi
was doing walking meditation
and he already proven his
what he was doing.
How to understand.
I mean,
I simply heard that
what he was doing is the need to receive.
But how?
How is it quite hard
to understand that?
It is because if you would,
you would be a subtle body.
But what he kept observing?
The very good experience.
Well, he was pondering and reflecting on Dhamma.
He was pondering on the nature of our arising.
So you lined up three people
and you did an experiment of them.
And you forget that you are the one observing the experiment.
So if you are focused on your experiment,
you will be able to see yourself experimenting.
But if you see yourself experimenting,
you can stop doing experiments.
You can just see yourself doing whatever.
So the lay you maintain mind for instance,
already you see the background that moved
the way how you are feeling
the mental state that in the
relation to the situation,
you can see how that affects you
on a particular level.
What it makes you think, what it makes you choose,
what it makes you dwell on.
And if it makes you dwell on the bad things
because you're in bad mood,
well, you can choose to dwell on not bad things.
Or you can choose to not dwell on bad things.
Or you dwell on good things
while you're in a bad mood.
You keep dwelling on good things
or more inspiring things.
And yeah, you can change that mood.
Because the mood is not completely independent
from a particular situation either.
From a particular
thoughts or perceptions.
But always it's on a different level.
They are simultaneously there,
but on a different level.
So I think exactly,
we don't need to know that the
fear of this body is in it. It's not that important.
I did the mood.
So in that case,
this body is now in the court.
It's not that important.
You don't have to think about the location.
But you have to think about you in the situation.
Which is your body in the situation.
So whether it's you and you could there,
you're in a talk talk,
or you're walking on a path,
you in a certain location,
which is what makes the whole situation.
Thinking about the kutti in the shape of the walls,
just have to know that you are in that situation.
And the bodily posture
is like the first kind of
first designation of your situation.
You're seated in such and such place.
You're standing in such and such.
It's like the most fundamental
external output you're in.
Because while you're seated,
you can't have intentions of,
you know, based on your standing,
or based on your walking,
or based on your lying down.
That's why being aware of your bodily posture
kind of makes you aware of the whole situation already.
But being aware of your bodily posture
has a background.
Not as a kind of going, observing sensation.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's actually very different that there is a mood
in the mental state.
Seeing it as general background is quite hard.
Something with appears in front.
Well, if it appears in front,
then there is something appearing in front.
But there is always a background to it.
So that doesn't mean that you lost the sight of your background.
Unless you got confused.
Supposedly that mood is in there.
Any mood is in there.
Happy or whatever.
It is not in front.
I have seated background.
Yeah.
But you can say, oh, I am happy.
And that doesn't mean that your background
will not change suddenly.
You can still be happy.
You shouldn't confuse that you saying I am happy
is your happiness.
Happiness is the state of mind,
which is always in the background.
The purpose of the practices
to understand the intention.
That the important.
Yeah, to overcome it.
To understand it, to overcome.
But recognizing that the things arise on their own,
by not being moved by your mood,
wholesome or unwholesome,
you end up like, well, you stop appropriating it.
You see, ah, this thing doesn't require sense of self.
Sense of self becomes part of that mood.
Me just becomes part of that whole picture
of background and of general in particular.
And by not knowing general in particular,
you were centered on yourself.
But now you recognize this operates without a self.
So the center from yourself is removed.
And when the center is not in the self,
that's not self.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
Actually, the center for you,
for the area, I believe in self in that.
Actually, if I sink,
or you actually serve before me in common.
It's up to me, because the fans fear this body thing.
Actually, according to the situation,
fear this body thing.
Actually, the mood changes.
I mean, it's quite strange,
but that is really self.
It wouldn't change.
But you are, it's something that needs to be,
you have to dwell on it, on and on.
Because the self is also,
you see it once,
you have to keep dwelling on it.
That it cannot be on,
that it's subject to cessation,
because it's already there.
Because you have no sense.
And if you dwell on it long enough,
then you stop feeling its mind.
Mm-hmm.
It means there's no meaning
that to keep seeing it, it's arising in tension.
If it has already,
it is given in tension,
so it is not mind.
If I keep observing,
there's no point of reading it.
Well, there is no point,
because if you do it like that,
you end up not taking responsibility for it.
First, you have to learn
how to always be responsible for that.
And then you can start saying,
yeah, this is not mind,
through that responsibility,
the order of things is important.
All the externally might be the same.
Yes, this doesn't belong to me.
It depends whether you said it before,
you took full responsibility or after.
If you said before,
means you obscure the responsibility,
you obscure the feeling,
you obscure the camera.
But if you do it after,
then how? Okay.
Without abandoning, which means you don't do it
for the reasons
of avoiding responsibility,
which is why people do it.
No, you accept responsibility,
you don't fear responsibility,
no matter how fearful it is,
and then you do it.
And then it can apply to responsibility.
But if you want to avoid responsibility and do it,
there's nothing,
because it can only apply to responsibility,
but because you avoid it,
there's nothing to apply to it.
So you end up just keep doing,
keep saying, keep denying,
but it doesn't really lead anywhere.
You just try to suppose,
but it doesn't really lead anywhere.
