So, as I was saying before, in terms of the sense of self, to what you are trying to do
it is invariably, but once you become established in terms of mindfulness or the experience as
a whole, as you said, which sort of reveals this sense of self has kind of separated from it.
If you get established in terms of practice knowing that you are not supposed to, that it's actually
impossible to bring that background sense of self, that ambiguous sense of self, to bring
it forward, to bring it front of you to see, because then something else will be the
very unfair.
So, when you kind of give up these futile attempts, based on these wrong habits of expecting
to get it in front of you, expect it to last bit, then that sense of self can become
the option for mindfulness itself.
If you're sensing incorrectly that background sense of self, that sense of I am, because
it is in a way more general than everything else, it's just that once you have discerned
the principle that it's actually fully determined by whatever you have put in front of you in
that experience as a whole, the fully depends upon it, that it's inconceivable without
same like the dependence of number of being out of the number of being out of the number
of being.
Then, just enough to have the sense of self, you don't need to then, in the beginning
you have to, but then you don't need to look for these determinations, even along the
right lines.
Why?
Because then, by then, it becomes apparent that whatever has a reason, that's why it's
apparent, so then you start seeing impermanence in simple things, in simple fact that things
have manifest.
No matter how big is how much or background, how much, it's impossible to kind of grasp
them, hold them, close and inspect them.
The fact that it's appeared in any shape of form, distant, big is removed, whatever, it's
apparent.
Because it has the beginning, by necessity, implies the end or other ending is the
end.
What is the meaning of the beginning?
What does it mean?
That it wasn't.
One of its meaning could be, if I say, well, what does it reveal basically?
What does it reveal?
Sure, that's me.
If it wasn't before, because if it wasn't before, it cannot be an internal self, because
if it weren't, then the self wouldn't have been there all the time.
The less it feels, the internal self feels.
You can't, you know, so back, you can't remember, kind of here, but that whole, that whole
of a large thing is a concept.
That can't be done in this presence, and that's what I told you, that if you were to
not, you're not supposed to give the rid of that sense of I am, you're just supposed
to undermine its gratuitous notion of permanence, of being constant.
So you have experience as a whole, and then you have that background sense of self, the
people can mystify, or, well, whatever, they're not mystically called it observer, or
pure awareness, pristine awareness, or whatever new age it turns you might come up with,
the fact is there is that thing, there is a background, that you cannot have in the
fund.
There is the observer of the observed, and that's not the problem.
The problem is that you still assume, imply the permanence associated with that observer,
no matter how far you mystify it, what words you use, the fact that you regard it, he has
a notion of mind to it, or real, or more control, more of a center of experience.
So you're not interfering with that, whatever you want to call it, but you want to interfere
with it, is that the truth is notion of permanence associated with it, and how interfered
with it, the only way you can do it is indirectly by seeing it inseparable from that which is permanent,
sorry, which is impermanent, which is fully understood as something that will have to
cease, when you then, through the, like, literally, fabrication through your efforts, you kind
of establish, you force upon the dependence of that observer, inverted commas, quote unquote
observer, if you just, like, force that the dependence upon that which is observed, then
the dependence will become revealed, why? Because there is genuine dependence of the two,
and through emulating it, first, simply based on the external advice, through emulating
the dependence, then it will become apparent eventually, why? Because it becomes apparent
only after a sufficient number of times, after it's been repeated, a number of times,
basically, as long as it takes, something that takes more, something that takes less.
So once you've been repeating this principle that your doctrine of faith externally, as
a true principle whereby observer is determined by that which is being observed, it's inseparable
from it, it cannot be conceived apart from it. If you keep emulating that, because there
is the actual nature of things, then it will become apparent. So it's like, it's complete,
it's complete darkness in the beginning, and somebody just tells you to keep repeating
these steps, they will eventually bring the light, but initially, you don't know.
What's the point of that, like, if you see certain things, external things are not in your
control, like, you get your body, whatever, the weather, so if you, or the bus game, time
or people liking you, your reputation is only in control, then if you truly see that
your reputation is only in control, if you find out that people are speaking bad about
you, then you're not necessarily going to get upset, because you throw any contemplative
bit out of my control, and they could say good things, they could say bad things, but
that's when they say bad things, they're not referring to the mind as withdrawn from
that domain. So when you realize that you're all, they're very sense of self,
there's not any other control, your mind is withdrawn from that.
But what about the view that they've been able to, your attitude towards things, like
the game, your attitude towards things, which is dependent on things being there, other
things, I mean?
Would you go beyond that view as well?
Actually, beyond your control.
The other hand.
Again, the noble evil path, in the case of another hand,
they added another, which is basically beyond...
What was the...
He was going beyond the views.
Car intention right after that, it goes on, on, on, on.
And then, basically, it's beyond.
How did he go that sort of the last two?
What was it?
It's the ten factors, ten.
Well, a capture, for example, basically.
The noble path becomes ten.
Yes.
Yes, it was basically...
Well, it's clearly indicated, okay, the...
And Arya Sava, of any form,
still has a degree of review.
And for another hand, he fully overcomes even the views as well.
So good beyond the views.
And that's what our entrepreneurs do.
So that's exactly it.
Yet, the view is, like, you can see very much as a law,
as an eternal law, as an impersonal law,
as a law that doesn't subject to anything, kind of,
from the physical law.
But actually, it's inseparable from it.
In its phenomenological nature,
it would not be there if things had not arisen
beforehand on a counter, which you have developed a view.
So now, the view might seem independent of it.
But the fact is, if the matter in its entirety disappears,
you can remain old in the view.
Given the right view.
Right, the wrong view.
Yeah.
So then you go beyond the view.
When you see fully abandoning that subtle depends on the view.
The view?
Like, a person can't go beyond...
You can't see that you're choosing.
Well, no, going beyond the view doesn't mean finding some area
beyond the view, which you then inhabit.
However, going beyond the view means abandoning the view.
Abandoning depends on the view.
In the same sense, you said...
For the view?
If you true...
Well, yeah.
But then it's easy to be the view.
Yeah, yeah.
The direction is still there, but it's easy to be the view.
The view is, for as long as you are taking it up.
So it's the same thing as you just said.
If you contemplate that praise is out of your control,
and you truly abandon it, then the blame will not affect you.
If you contemplate the view...
Views are fully a reason based on their reason things before,
and then you fully abandon that as well.
So it doesn't mean they never appear.
It just means they'll never be yours.
It means they'll never be manifested as views.
Because using the word view implies my point of view,
my direction, my take on things, or whatever.
How subtle it may be, the point is to go beyond it,
which means the mind is not established on it either.
What?
Third.
In any way.
So going beyond the view does not mean going into the realm of transcendental existence.
It means mind letting go of the view as well.
Depending.
But truly letting go of the view, not all letting go of the views now.
Like fully developing this principle of simultaneous dependence that I've been talking about,
to a full extent whereby even the subtlety of views is announced,
is announced as yours.
As as as as as as like a center of mind, everything is just completely disowned.
And that comes with that.
So it's not about figuring out what's beyond the view.
It's not about feeling what's behind this observer or where he comes from,
what he is or what can I paint it to.
It's all about seeing a no matter what it is as a background,
it will depend on the foreground.
Or rather, it depends on the foreground, right there, right now.
It depends not in a linear sense whereby one led to the number two,
but more like in the simultaneous sense where one detends is one.
So the presence of it is inseparable from this.
So if you hold, and as I said, it can be as general as mind and body.
You don't have to necessarily pursue any more particular definitions.
Mind and body, physical and mental, can call it that.
As I said, mental, you have to make this connection that's descended
and then keep repeating them until they become apparent whereby you see that mind.
No matter how independent it might seem, our mind might feel,
it's inseparable from the presence of the physical body, like inconceivable.
Well, you can imagine physical body dying by the mind continuing.
But that's like not falling from the final.
It means that's not mindful thinking.
If you're mindful, you will see whenever there is a thought of you
as a whatever personality or mind or whatever,
there are implied images of your body or your matter or something.
Or something exactly like a light, like a space, like an eye.
Anything, and you realize that is matter.
That stands for what matter is.
It does. I cannot even conceive.
Anything mental without this matter already being there,
given before and simultaneously.
Any other way around as well, you realize that absolutely no matter how far out
into the matter you go, you realize this matter is inconceivable
if I'm not determining it, even mutually recognizing it.
Yeah, recognizing it, and designation, recognition, everything,
that's all mental. That's all pertains to the mind.
So, you realize, well, no matter, like I can truly examine
the forms of all I'm examining is, the perception of that matter
can never be directly accessed in your experience.
Your body cannot be accessed directly in your experience.
So, it's always in regard to the body.
Yet, it's that because of which your mind is there in the first place.
I mean, if you look at, I think it's the same one.
If you look at choosing, because choosing is there.
If you don't get further than that.
You look at choosing, and then you couldn't choose anything
if there wasn't these choices there.
Yeah.
Exactly.
So, even though you've got power, and you've got the power to choose
between good and bad, I wouldn't.
Both are already there before, and the choice is given before,
and which means the power of choice is fully determined
upon the things that are given before.
To free will is the same one I'm saying.
Yeah.
Like, it's free will, but there is a freedom to choose this or that.
Yeah.
But it's fully within the given parameters of choice,
which means it's fully imprisoned.
It's not free free, because you can't create anything free.
You can only shift from left to right or whatever within
what that which is already given.
So, you cannot even conceive stepping outside of it.
Because stepping outside of it, usually people assume
it's either frame from choice, thus I don't engage in it,
and there was another choice.
Yeah.
Are you afraid from choosing is something that you chose?
Or, then, why do you choose something over another?
Well, I see that's your assumption that they would want
to explain the choice, which means you want to take the control over the choice,
which means if you want to put a sentence or choice,
which means it's taken as yourself, comes from the assumption of the self.
Why do you choose something over the other?
Well, I mean, I would, for what have I been like,
there's tenancies in one, there's only tenancies.
Yeah, in a month.
So, he said, couldn't you say there was a reason for it?
Well, the thing is, see, the choice works in the same way,
like they were we spoke when I referred to it similarly
from the soldiers of, you know, the rain falls on the top of the mountain,
they're in the springs from the top of the mountain,
but then as they come down, they're getting bigger and bigger
because they collect more and more water,
then you have the pools, mountain pools filled with water.
And they start overflowing, they fill out the lower pools and lower,
and then you have the ocean, but all comes from the same water.
So, what you're asking now is only in the level of ocean.
It's all within the level of full development and then what did I choose?
But basically, all of your choices that you're making
are kind of, well, they're all form of directions.
Choice is a direction to choose, which means every particular direction
has been determined by more general directions.
So, you can say, well, why did I choose right here?
Why did I choose this thing right here right now?
And they were always going to be an element of kind of spontaneity.
To a degree, sometimes more, sometimes less,
depending on how much people, but spontaneity is a very,
a very phenomenon, a circumstance, a chance.
It's a phenomenon that you can then choose to be the reason for your choice.
But more importantly than that, why you choose particular things
is because of the stuff you chose in the past.
So, now people, for example, like, you know,
there are many cases that I met,
where people who get inspired by the situation want to practice
with the situation, but they've been out in the low of,
for quite some time, accumulated things, accumulated people,
accumulated family and children.
And now, they can't just choose to leave it all behind.
It's too much.
So, then they say, well, obviously, it's not my fault
that I can't become a monk.
Well, actually, it is.
If you want to see it as a fault, it is a fault.
Why?
Because of the 30 years beforehand,
you've been choosing all the things they've been taking the away elsewhere.
And you did not consider at the time when you wanted to find a wife
and have children that, who knows, in about 10 years,
I might despise it all.
In 15 years, I might want to leave and become a monk.
You didn't think that.
You just thought what your sense desire was dictating it.
So often, people choose a determined by senses.
Because senses are independent of five animals,
simply, they just drag you left and right,
and then you think you are choosing left or right
in terms of the beautiful sides, because you already given in
to the pressure of beautiful sides.
Beautiful touches, agreeable tasteness.
So, that's most often the why people choose.
Because they just take for granted the criteria of sense pleasure.
If you start contemplating that,
the danger in sense, you just stop choosing a sense pleasure.
When you stop choosing a sense pleasure, those pools will dry up.
Bit by bit, and then they won't be filled anymore.
So, there is the choice.
So, if you want to find out why did I choose right this right now?
Why did I choose that?
Well, start looking back.
What did you choose before and before?
And I mean more general.
I didn't mean in the linear sequence,
what I've chosen five minutes ago and 15 minutes ago.
I mean, what did I choose to do in my life that led me to this point?
So, if you say, why did I choose to go and live on top of a mountain now,
when I could have gone to a monk?
Well, because at first I chose to become a monk.
10-11 years ago.
Then I've chosen to come to Sri Lanka.
Then I've chosen to find a more secluded place.
Then I said, and now I have this particular choice that results out of that.
So, in that sense, no matter how spontaneous the choice is,
you are responsible for it because of the previous choices you made,
because of the previous choices you made,
because of the previous choices you made.
So, all of the choices you made,
the options, so to speak, were given to you before and initially?
You do choose the direction and within that direction,
you choose other directions and other directions.
Something circumstance, accident, things happen,
but that's all part of the human realm.
And that just shows you that no matter how evolution,
how evolutional your choices are,
they're always going to remain, well, out of your control.
Because no matter what you chose, what you built,
what direction you took,
it cannot be taken away in one stroke of bad luck.
But it's not like it's in someone else's control.
No.
Or something else's control.
Well, that's when you project your sense of self,
that you can't let go of externalism
and then you're assuming a goal.
A goal that meant, and then you pray,
and then you become super-
or rather then you tap into the kind of natural incline superstitiousness of people,
which is basically praying to something external,
because you recognize that.
You recognize the no matter how much effort you put,
how far you go, how carefully you choose,
everything can be taken away the next second from you,
and destroyed.
So what you do, because you don't know
that you're supposed to let go of your own sense of self.
You don't see that as the way out.
You can't even conceive yourself, not being yours.
So then you just end up projecting that sense of externalism.
So you end up worshipping trees,
caves, stones, deities, whatever.
Externally, through that sense of self,
as if exactly, you realize this is not in my control,
but you, by default, assume that it's in someone else's control,
or something else's control, which is still taking itself.
Making assumptions.
Yeah, so you become superstitious.
If you don't believe it anywhere, you become like magical.
You think, oh, if I step on my left foot first,
it's going to be a bad luck.
It's just completely random.
But it's still projected in the same external principle.
But if I look back to why,
if I read off myself why I want you in this,
and I look back in general,
or ever say the other day, it was like,
what do you choose?
You choose what is pleasant.
You choose what you think is pleasant.
Yeah, they would come down to the core, basically.
You choose based on how you feel.
What are you saying?
Most often.
You're craving for pleasure.
The delight in pleasure is the reason.
Well, for doing many of the things you think.
Yeah, it's not the reason for choice,
because choice is one of the other reasons.
Like, not the reason.
Yeah, it's not the reason.
It's not its origin.
It's just the reason why you choose certain choices.
But the nature of choice remains regardless of the craving.
Choice is one of the arguments.
The intentions, Chetan, that's already choice.
Everything is intentional.
Everything is directional in that sense.
So you just want the attention,
what intention you attend.
So then the choice becomes down to attending to things.
And that's why you would have often say,
he carefully attends.
Not careless, because if you carelessly attend,
then you already start feeling a certain direction.
So by the time the choices are kind of crystallized as options,
you're actually fully responsible
because you've been dwelling on those things in your mind.
So if one somebody carelessly attends to the sign of beauty
and ends up lasting after it,
he can't be surprised that then his choice
is about pursuing the central pleasure
or, okay, saying no to it,
but there's nothing in between.
He can't say anything in between,
because it's all about centrality,
because his mind has been dwelling.
And obviously, then he'll choose to pursue it.
He's not strong enough to say no.
The choice of no is present in everything.
And that's when you realize that you can...
You yourself can undermine everything as well.
But this thing, that knowledge has to be presented to you.
You need to know before and...
Yes, you can't.
Or there's a different way.
Oh, there's no there was a choice there.
So your intentions...
Your intentions become fueled by the simple attention
of what you attend more,
what you attend at the expense of what...
And then those intentions then,
determined further down the line,
cause the forms of choices you made in your life.
But if you were to know that,
if you just then...
No matter what choices you made,
if it's like...
Ah, the example I gave,
the man who wants to leave it all behind
but feels responsible for his family and he can't give it in.
If he still doesn't give it to bad fate
and if he still doesn't obscure the sense of guilt
that he himself wrote himself into that position,
if he starts to attend constantly
on the freedom from suffering,
on the Buddhist teaching of whatever,
soon and well,
eventually, maybe not soon,
but eventually he will build enough resolve
to leave it all behind.
He just might take longer than somebody who doesn't
and the family and kids and everything else.
But they don't attempt it.
No, they just look at it.
I want to do it right now,
but I can't do it because of my family
and then they dishonor responsibility for it
as if it wasn't them who built that family
and then they don't think about it anymore.
And then they just cement,
cement it, like cement over it,
as if it's done.
It's all that I can't possibly do it
because of this,
and I'm not responsible for any of it,
thus I'll just have to do what I can.
But what I got,
was to see that the choice to leave it all behind
or freedom from the choice to be freedom suffering.
The guy who's just living his life with it,
having a family with it.
That choice appears.
He doesn't, he doesn't just,
he doesn't know even to mention it.
He just kind of is there.
No, I'm talking about why would he choose that
or why he wouldn't choose that,
why he wouldn't be able to choose
which is right to us originally.
It's because he's either too weak in regard to it,
to such choice,
too weak to say that, too weak to stir himself up,
I, too weak to accept the pain,
they would come with it initially,
too weak to see through the immediate pleasure that appears
as not fully gratifying,
because it's pleasant to be in the safety of your home
and family,
but in a long run, it's more dangerous.
But he's too weak to see any of that,
because he's not attending to it on a daily basis.
Yet, if he was to not give in
to that kind of cover-up of his own guilt
for his own choices,
cover-up of his own responsibility for his own choices,
he would be able to keep dwelling on it,
to attend to it.
And if he does attend sufficiently,
there won't be no amount of children
of family to keep you in their life
if you recognize the true danger of human existence,
the peril of it.
I mean, you know, the sisters,
there were people who just saw through it
who were like about to become kings, the queens,
with everything laid out for them,
like what everybody would just wish for.
Yet, they were like disgusted with the whole thing
and left it the next moment.
Now, he said, well, can't I leave it the next moment?
Well, whenever you leave it,
it's going to be left the next moment,
because that's how leaving works.
Why you can't reach to the next moment
when you leave things is because
you haven't been building it up,
and you build it up through simply attending to things.
So, you're only someone I seek at the proper attention,
and it's like the root of everything.
That's what you're saying.
And you can't know about those things you need to be attending to,
without...
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
Without good friends.
So, without somebody telling you what you need to attend to.
So, that's what it's like.
That they're good friends.
It's not in your control.
Like, they might be out there, but you know.
Oh, yeah.
You don't have anything like that.
Well, that's what I said.
Like, I can't choose.
There is a degree of just complete like circumstance.
But then at the same time,
as I said, circumstances are so, yeah.
You might have been lucky to come across the Buddhist teaching.
But luck has nothing to do with you choosing to practice or not,
with you drilling and year after year-making efforts
of like undoing the ignorant habits of your mind.
There is absolutely no room for luck there.
And that's why, yeah.
Sometimes in the soon,
there's the monks who have developed the Sahgit Pavels to see beyond.
They would say, oh, yeah.
I met that person,
because in the previous life,
we were close,
and then we were bound to kind of revolve around each other,
no matter where we're reborn and so on.
But all that is irrelevant.
How it came to be,
it's irrelevant.
Why? Because you're responsible for what you do and account of it.
You're responsible for what you choose.
And the thing is, see, many people,
even back in the Buddha,
they came across the Buddha,
but not all of them seen His wisdom
and not like not even half of them choose to follow it.
So people can come across the purists of the Dharma instructions
and not even recognizing as such.
Why? Because they don't have that proper attention.
So the two factors for the right view,
proper attention,
and afterance of another.
And proper attention, basically,
it's not a momentary,
I can't even write with my second note.
Proper attention is an attitude
of looking at things rightly,
not obscuring the things.
So a responsible authentic attitude
will be an attitude of proper attention.
Obviously, if nothing is instructed to you,
to properly attend,
that proper attention in itself
can only do out of the suffering.
But with the right attitude, the proper attitude,
the attitude of proper attention,
and the right instruction,
you will know what to look for,
you will know what to keep attending.
Because as we spoke before,
the environment can't happen by luck
because attending to something rightly
has to be done way more than once,
has to be done countless numbers of times
until the handle of ignorance,
of the acts of ignorance,
wears, thin, thinner, thinner, thinner.
But if you pick up the acts once,
the wouldn't handle,
there's absolutely no difference.
And if you don't know,
that you're supposed to keep doing it on and on,
and on, and on, and on, and on,
for seven days,
seven months, seven years,
who knows?
Seven lifetimes.
If you don't know that,
there is nothing to indicate to you
that you should pick that acts again.
Because you can pick it once,
twice, five times,
by accident,
by chance, by your own reasoning.
But there won't be any apparent proof
or a verification
that this is the way out of suffering,
not anytime soon.
So unless somebody tells you
that there is a way out,
and you keep sticking to it,
you won't do it.
You just, like throwing a coin.
You can throw a coin,
and you can get,
head, five times, ten times,
but it's simply impossible,
that thousand times,
thousand throws,
will always yield the same result,
impossible.
And that's exactly it.
During these thousand times,
without knowing that you're supposed to,
it's not about head and tail,
it's about actually throwing the coin,
that's what I'm doing.
And let somebody tells you that,
you won't know,
because you won't be apparent.
That's why the, like you know,
someone, somebody who did,
and liked himself,
with his own efforts,
without any external advice,
is like the greatest.
And should that simple trial and error,
that took him like lifetimes to develop?
So unless somebody tells you what you're doing now,
keep doing it,
maybe find you on it,
or point out more,
or whatever,
inspiring similar ways to develop the same principle,
unless you read it somewhere,
unless you're faith in what you read,
it's simply impossible,
that you repeated exactly the same way,
for thousands of times,
because there is no result to it.
No, no, no result to it.
You can't see the example where you're clean.
You just can't see it.
Good as a thing.
There might be someone who might point out,
what can I have that will keep,
that will help me make the right,
the right choice,
all the time.
What can I have?
What is necessary for making the right choice all the time?
Yeah.
That's basically impossible.
You can know that you make the right choice,
only after you have repeated it,
like only after you discovered your handle,
one thing, you'll know,
I worry thin.
And that's exactly it.
People think it's like throwing the coin,
and then you throw it,
and you go to the right,
no.
It doesn't matter where it's head or tail.
What matters is thousands,
and thousands,
and thousands of times of flicking,
and flicking it,
and flicking it.
And just see it, see it, see it.
And then you realize,
it wasn't about the head or tail,
it was about wearing the dang coin down.
And wearing what the coin is irrelevant
to the result that you get when you throw the coin,
it's your expectation that leads you to results.
But the actual efforts,
of throwing it regardless of result,
is what worry down.
So, I'm going to,
on another level,
another level of difference.
Well, just on a similar level,
the photo will just one more thing,
and unless you know what you're supposed to do,
throw an afternoon off another,
be reading with suit as a study,
or whatever else,
whatever way you might have arrived at it,
it's impossible that you would have been repeating
the same efforts
in the same way for a long time.
It's just impossible.
Because there is no guidance
on what those efforts are.
So, if you're using your own judgment,
and the old judgment is influenced
by the inevitable expectation of pleasure
in your form of peace or whatever,
but basically you would be acting on your pleasure,
which means there will be some cravings,
which means unless somebody does externally,
and then you have faith
into that more than what your own,
like initial inclinations,
you won't undo that.
Because then you need to keep repeating that,
which is contrary to your own existence,
going against the grain.
So, if somebody defines the grain,
so you can go against,
you won't be able to go,
because everything you do is with your grain.
So, you need that external input
in which your have faith
to keep sticking to it.
But without that,
without that external instruction,
it's impossible that you would be repeating the same effort,
the same quality of effort,
sufficient amount of time.
So, a person can attend to the right view,
accidentally,
and then they can do it again,
but if they never heard about the right view,
if they never heard what the right view is,
if they never heard what the right view is,
how to the right view,
they never heard what to look for in the right view,
they never recognized what they just done was the right view,
which means it's unthinkable
that they repeat the same experience,
thousands and thousands and thousands of times,
it's simply unthinkable.
Why? Because they don't recognize
that experience for what it is,
they don't want to know what to look for or not and not.
So, they might accidentally,
that's what it's impossible to become
even a sort of owner by sheer accident,
or I heard it once.
When people hear something once,
like in the suitors,
they have the study once,
because their minds were already developed
through these right habits beforehand.
So, the same repetition has been already developed,
and now they go like the last kind of drift
that sort of covered it all right there.
But except that,
you can't, you know,
come down, you know,
come down to the efforts.
So, if someone is riddled with lust,
at one point, at one time,
riddled with anger,
there was no how-can-ite,
simply not choose that direction,
to go in that direction.
If I see that, I don't,
there's a choice.
I can either continue with this lustful mode,
or not,
what starts me funny.
What makes me choose not to follow that lustful direction?
Well,
and what makes me choose to go further,
that's what it is.
See, if it comes to the point of being riddled
by anger,
by lust or by anger,
well, what you need to recognize
is that you kind of let yourself get into that state.
And once you're in that state,
there is nothing else that you can do,
except endure.
And that is a form of choosing no.
So that's why, you know,
the strength of mind to just withstand
no is necessary.
But that does not necessarily bring the,
it's necessary when things kind of
come up of such nature
that you just have to endure then.
But basically,
that's only like one way of dealing with it
at a time,
because fundamentally you want to find a state
where those things don't bother you at all,
and there is no form of indulence.
And that comes with wisdom.
And that wisdom comes with foreseeing these things.
So you ended up in a state of rack,
racked by anger or by lust,
because, you know,
for days and weeks before,
you didn't pay any attention to it.
Or you paid attention to it wrongly.
Or you were attending,
or you were attending certain central notions,
or certain irritable notions,
then, you know,
paid a few circumstances
with something that happened
with a bad mood,
with this,
with a lack of sleep,
now results in this full on anger.
Oh,
but what do I do right here right now?
Well, what you do right here,
and I recognize,
right here right now,
was influenced by, you know,
quite some time before,
or if you're careless attending,
so then you become even more concerned
about attending things wrongly later on.
So you actually learn from it,
but at the time in itself,
just clench your teeth,
press the tongue against the ruffa and endure it.
As the Buddha said,
sometimes just you need to,
like a stronger man,
paint down the weak man,
who kind of went mad.
But you have a reflexive contemplation.
Of course, of course.
This is my response.
Sometimes, well,
you just have to endure it.
Once you endure it,
once you haven't given in,
you recognize,
yeah, this is how it came about.
It was through my case as attending,
so,
so then you become more concerned
about attending things carefully,
which means,
such extreme examples
where you just have to purely endure,
will be a rising less and less.
Why?
Because you're not, you're going away from it.
In the beginning, every thought
of centrality or anger
is the wrecking,
centrality or wrecking anger.
Because the mind is just left the right,
everywhere,
and nowhere.
Once you start developing that mind,
once you start recognizing
this influence of the, you know,
the mountain streams
in filling down the oceans,
then you start,
you'd stop all the time
to enter the oceans,
you just go and deal with the mountain streams,
because you know
eventually these oceans will dry up.
So, in the same sense,
but carefully attending to things,
beforehand,
such extreme experiences
won't be waiting for you down the line.
But,
before you've done that.
Before you've done that,
you do need to endure
a fair bit of it.
Yeah.
But then you...
Depending how quickly you do it,
how quickly you extract this from it.
Do you have that contemplation?
Yes, reflective.
But inevitably,
to some extent,
it will come down to endurance,
endurance every now and then.
And there is a very
aspect of practice in endurance,
because that's the thing.
Endurance?
No matter what circumstances
have brought the options
for your choice in front of you,
it will be you choosing to...
Well, you're intentionally
intending some aspects of it,
even at the time.
So, obviously,
it can be very painful
to attend to the opposite.
I need to say no.
But it's only painful
because your mind has been going
in the direction of sensuality
for such a long time.
You haven't been extracted
from it.
You haven't been attending properly.
So, now, when you have to say no,
it's just so hard,
because the whole other one,
she's already going in.
It's so painful to stop it.
Yet, you can always do it.
And that's...
That makes endurance easier.
You can always say no.
Literally.
Literally, if you have wisdom.
Like you can...
If you have strength,
and wisdom in regard to...
Like you can have wisdom.
You can know where you're supposed to choose.
But if your mind is not developed,
you will be swept
by the benevolence of kind of
predetermined directions
that you've been cultivating
for so long.
This is the wrong thing.
This is the wrong thing, too.
But I can't help it,
because I'm too weak.
But even then,
you can say no to your weakness.
So, you can always be a step ahead.
And that's how reflection works.
That's how intention works.
Or step above.
So, you can ever
family and 15 kids
and absolutely nothing stops you.
The next moment,
you just walk out
and never come back.
Or from your job,
or from any other form of responsibility,
that you, yourself,
have accumulated.
And that is the accumulation.
Your ocean is an accumulation
of the water from the top.
And then you complain,
but you're the one
who left the tap open
and at the very top.
So, nothing stops you.
At any given time,
you're just going to close it.
And then,
just walk out.
But,
what stops you is the weakness.
So, that's why,
sometimes,
people can do it
over a period of time
where they have built up
the determination to leave
or the determination
to send note,
whatever.
Or sometimes,
something extremely
to happen.
Like, in the cities,
when people met
with extreme misfortunes,
and think about misfortunes,
and that's not the matter
where they may not go the other way.
All of the monks
who haven't been quite fully developed
in terms of Arachie,
but they were there
with the right view and everything.
And then,
they often die
when they were about to be
set on fire
by the highway
or whatever else.
Then, they kind of abandoned it all internally.
When, when,
think got real.
Yes, the person,
they're responsible for investing
in external things
like a family,
investing in the sense,
believing at that.
But, nothing stops you.
They just walk out.
That's going to give me happiness.
Nothing stops you.
But, nothing stops you
to the next moment
to refuse to breathe.
It's just obviously,
it's unpleasant
to not breathe.
So, you never even consider it.
But, breathing is another choice.
Neutral choice.
But, something you keep doing.
It's an action.
So, nothing stops you
to refuse to take an extinguisher.
Nothing.
And obviously,
there's no point in not
taking an extinguisher.
But, I'm just illustrated there.
The point I'm making.
So, you can say no
in any given time,
twenty-thing.
And that's the nature of
the aggregate of choice,
the aggregate of intention.
You also?
He has its own domain.
In separable form,
inconceivable form,
other aggregates,
but in itself,
it's an independent thing.
Does intention suffer?
No, intention is intended.
Intentions suffer.
Feelings will be,
or feelings will be,
the feeling suffer.
Every feeling is suffering.
Until you're another.
Where by feeling nothing,
feelings are suffering.
Every feeling,
the fact that you feel good about
pleasure or pain
or neutral,
dead suffering,
the fact that you're susceptible
to a feeling.
So, feelings feel intentions intent,
perception perceive.
However, you can't possibly
take these three
and examine them
without the other two.
They're always together.
So, you can't,
okay, show.
So, there is a degree of
independence
as a domain in perception
and feeling and intention.
But they're inseparably
inconceivable without,
so you can't just think
about feeling
without involving perception
and intention.
But you can discern them.
As they arise,
simultaneously,
as this kind of group,
well, the three are,
you can,
you can still, within that,
discern and,
discern disseparably makes.
And thus, intentions intent.
Feelings feel.
Why does intention intent this
or intention intent that?
Well, once you stop acting
out of your feelings,
once you fully understood
the feelings,
you wouldn't be
intending based on how you feel
because there was inconceivable
to begin with.
Intentions cannot make
with feelings.
It's a different domain,
different aggregate.
The completely oblivious
to each other.
Intentions are intentions.
They intend.
Feelings are feeling they feel.
Intentions don't feel
or feelings do intend.
But it's your ignorance
of region in regards to
the kind of maker homeless,
whereby you end up intending
based on how you felt,
which was inconceivable to do,
but until you knew that it was
inconceivable,
you were doing it for that very reason.
So then the question,
why did I intend this?
So that becomes,
well, inconceivable as well.
Why does intention intent?
Because it's an intention
that intends.
That's what it works.
And even the question,
did you ask,
why does this intent?
There was always an intention
that intended.
They then tried to find
a reason for intention
elsewhere.
In the feeling of whatever else,
the projected notion of the world.
But I can use,
like that,
the idea of,
well, I can use that
design for pleasure
to dig me out.
I think.
You can use the design
for pleasant, pleasant.
Yeah.
One thing to be free
from suffering is wanting
to experience peace,
which is from pleasure.
I mean.
But you have to discern
and what pleasure.
And the word did, you know,
when you realize,
okay, hold on.
Not all the pleasure is bad.
Some of the pleasure is just pleasure.
It does not necessarily
imply anything unhulsing,
such as under-intensive.
So bending all that pleasure,
the one that's unhulsing,
and then it's fine.
You won't have an issue.
Because then the pleasure
to the rises is that pleasure
it's not unhulsing.
So the design for pleasure
can be used to basically
develop wisdom to recognize that,
sure, I could go after immediate pleasure
or relatively immediate pleasure.
But that won't bring any kind of,
well, they won't bring any freedom
from desire for pleasure.
It will just maintain
the same desire for pleasure,
which means that we're just revolving
on the circle.
And no matter how I'm doing the pleasure I get,
the desire for pleasure remains intact,
which means I need more pleasure.
I need other pleasure.
I need different pleasure.
I need same pleasure.
Repetitive.
Your mind is defeated.
Mind will need pleasure.
So what if,
and that section I'm present,
being in fact
by constant pursuit of pleasure?
I need to develop virtue.
I need to.
Sometimes I can't say no to it.
Or sometimes what I desire for my pleasure
I simply can't get.
Thus I'll experience pain
in every step.
So what if I abandon the whole thing?
So that nothing can cause me pleasure of pain,
thus I won't be disturbed.
And then itself,
that notion is very pleasant.
So then you forsake the immediate pleasure
for the sake of that greater future pleasure
of peace,
of non-disturbance,
of the disturbance of, you know,
the abandoning of suffering.
Then you can also think about
yes, but looking into the future
is saying if I choose this now,
not going after the last four objects,
not indulging in the past,
then in the future,
I'll be free from all sorts of failures.
Well, yeah.
As simple as that,
reflecting right here right now,
that if you choose to say no to the choice of last,
means by not engaging the last,
further down the line in the future,
you'll be able to see through the nature of that last.
And then be free from it once and for all.
So that's why the restraint
needs to come first.
See that comes before the dharma.
To get some photos of it.
Well, exactly.
Because if you don't say no to it,
then once you're in it,
you can't be conceiving,
okay, now once I'm fully within the domain last,
I can practice a separation from last,
being free from last.
No, because you just place yourself in it.
Basically, again, the similarly from the sutras,
trying to light the fire with the two sticks,
you need to dry them up.
So if you had the two semi-dry sticks,
and you choose to stay on the ground,
and say no to the water,
say no to the lust,
then we'll dry out.
And you can know that,
so all you need to do is resist the urge to go into water.
That is very impressing at the time.
But if you say no,
you know that I mentioned these sticks will dry,
and when they do dry,
you can light the fire of knowledge,
and so on.
Even in the other hand,
you have the semi-dry sticks,
and you choose to go back in the water,
no matter how much you wish for them to be dry,
you are in the water,
they will not be dry.
So you can't have any reasonable expectation
to light up the fire of knowledge
and see through the nature of lust,
because you just set yourself back in the water.
You have to have it reasoned.
Yeah, reasoned.
For seeing it, expecting it,
knowing where it's going to lead,
and choosing the opposite.
And that's why,
non-lust is,
you can never go wrong with it,
by saying no to lust,
or greed,
no to aversion,
or delusion.
It can never result,
in unwholesome.
A renunciation can never result,
in unwholesome.
Which is why,
it is wholesome.
It can never participate in anything unwholesome.
So if you're ever in doubt,
oh, should I say yes?
So no, just see which one has lust in it.
Which choice would have lust?
If saying no implies lust,
then do the opposite.
Yeah.
Like, oh,
if I stay here,
where, you know,
I'll be subjected to lustful impressions
or to anger impressions.
So,
if I stay here,
I leave myself acceptable to this thing so I'll go.
So I won't say yes to stay here.
I'll say no.
Oh,
if somebody says,
do what I,
do what I,
do what I want to go elsewhere,
and you know that that place is more risky
in terms of
inducing lust,
or aversion,
or whatever,
then you say no to that.
So you always say no to lust,
aversion, delusion.
But in volatile,
that might sometimes mean saying yes to certain things.
Yes.
Yes.
I want to leave this place.
No.
I don't want to stay here.
Or no.
I want to go there.
Yes.
I want to stay here.
And that choice,
if there is wisdom,
will be determined like which one is,
which one implies non-lust,
or which one implies cessation of lust,
cessation of aversion,
cessation of aversion.
Sometimes it's not that clear.
But then you see,
well, which one is more likely
to be implying non-lust,
non-aversion,
non-delusion.
So that's what you choose.
Even though, oh, okay,
oops,
I went to this place and now it's,
it's filled with...
Oops, yeah.
But then within that,
you can choose the non-lust,
non-aversion,
that doesn't mean giving inferno.
Because you intended, firstly,
to go against the lust,
so that's the main.
Yes.
Yeah.
Whatever the external results come,
that's not...
Exactly.
Because your choice was governed by the,
by the kind of, well,
the criteria of renunciation
in terms of create aversion delusion.
And that is the whole thing.
So, yeah,
I have not been in the middle of the village,
but I came there
through avoiding the other lust,
and now here I can keep doing the same.
Because it's always a matter of choice.
You know, last,
the version delusion can never,
like, be thrown on you
without your choice or say.
You might not be able to say no to it,
if you're not developing regard to it,
but it always remains...
But it's down to...
It's down to you,
like it's the first end of kind of,
that's the standard that you start,
all the base.
No...
I can't reach you in the middle of the illusion.
Yeah.
I do my best to...
to do that.
And then you can tell you that further,
even to your own thinking,
but you might not be doing anything
and also in terms of the body of the speech,
but your mind on this earlier
was things good stuff.
Then you take it there,
and then address that.
It's always sometimes the other way
or how I want to go for a retreat.
You can give me a brief instruction,
and say, you know,
I can ponder on it.
Okay, whatever you know,
it's an awesome abandoning,
whatever you know,
it's awesome cultivating.
That's it.
Three months later,
Ireland emerges from the retreat,
because that's all they're kind of
doing, and it's enough to communicate.
I like that, because it's...
it's set up...
a person that...
what is an awesome...
what is...
Yeah.
Awesome.
Because then it sets up
that whole contemplation,
having to watch the choice,
having to...
Everything you build on double-end and double-end.
Yes.
What's it?
Am I?
Oh, is this a good choice?
Is this whole interest or not?
Well, have a look.
Is it based...
is it founded in your desire?
Yeah.
In what desire is it founded?
Like, I'm only going to live on top of the mountain,
where it's quiet, undisturbed,
solitude, so I can practice.
That's a good desire.
That's a desire that I can tell.
It has a good...
good chance of resulting in fear from something.
It's a mother person.
I want to...
externally, it can look the same.
I want to go and live on top of the mountain,
free from people, free from disturbance.
Why?
Because I...
hate them.
I can't live with them.
I can't stand them.
I can't...
Listen to what people...
They are a source of my anger.
Yeah.
Yeah, whatever.
So, out of that anger, I want to run,
they will be protected from the disturbances.
But, not necessarily, I want to run,
they're okay.
I can't deal with this anger.
So, I want to run from the anger,
where I will address that anger,
so that I can never ever be angry in the future.
If you see it...
No.
Basically, this is what bothers me.
I'll just shout it.
And how you shout it?
I'll shout it by going to the different monastery.
When the monastery starts bothering me,
I go to another monastery.
And I go, they don't live on top of the hill,
when nobody will disturb me.
But I myself won't be doing anything about the possibility
to be disturbed in the first place.
Because that's a problem.
The problem is not that you've been disturbed
through anger or lust.
The problem is that you lie about it.
So, even if anger or lust never ever arise in the future,
if it remains as a possibility,
it means you're still within the domain of anger and lust.
Which means there's no question,
no idea, like, notion of freedom there.
Not a real one at least.
So, that's what you recognize.
It's not about me suffering right now.
It's about possibility to suffer in the future.
And that's suffering in itself.
That concern is unpleasant.
And if you undo that,
then you can't suffer in the present, by anything.
So, if you cease to be liable to aversion,
liable to lust, liable to delusion,
even if you're in the middle of the village,
nobody can make you angry.
Nobody can make you lustful.
So, yes, I'll bend you knee to extract yourself.
Ah, from it.
But you have to be clear as to why are you doing so.
Whether your desire is rooted in genuine desire
to be free from suffering down the line,
or if it's rooted in simple desire to run away.
Oh, this bothers me.
I'll go and things are more pleasant and peaceful.
But then, you know,
you won't be in control of the new situation,
fundamentally, so when that changes,
that's when you have people who look like,
I don't know, I've helped me live for whatever
for 20-30 years,
and if they ever end up back in the community
or in a hospital,
they're just losing.
Nothing.
No involvement.
Nothing.
And then you have the other people
who might have seen a degree of this,
but then they develop a viewer account of it,
which overrides the current experience,
now that's why I've used the dangerous,
because you can like contradict exactly
what you're experiencing.
So they might have been developing a view
that, no, you should never leave the group of people,
because there will be only running away.
Not necessarily.
It can be running away if that's what you act out of.
But if you act out of,
I'm going to run away from this right now,
so that I can deal with it fully,
so that then I wouldn't care whether I'm alone or without this.
No, that's a good running away.
But people who kind of might have seen the danger running away
or met a few people who ran away,
then they came back and lost it.
Then without trying themself,
without distinguishing the nature of the motive in itself,
then they're working the view that no.
Leaving the group, leaving the setting is bad.
No, no.
You make it good or bad depending on the reasons for your action.
Depending whether it was rooted in wholesome or unwholesome.
And the view is unwholesome.
Why? Because you just override any good and bad by saying it's bad.
Because it can be good or can be bad depending on why you do it.
Like leaving the group, going to live alone or similar.
You can't.
But you can put a blanket rule over it.
You just cover it with a bed and that's bad.
Now you cover it all up and now you can't see the nature.
Which means there won't be any discernment of wholesome.
I'm rooted in wholesome, rooted in our wholesome.
You decided before that.
Yeah, I mean both of those things are the externals.
It's because of the external things.
Yeah.
That's one sufferer.
Yeah.
So therefore I will stay in a community because...
To keep the external things in the same way so I want something.
Because being in it, there's many people that helps.
And it's not incidental that always those views that are kind of pasted over the actual particular things that you might be experiencing.
Those views are always fueled by the unwholesome.
Well, not taking responsibility.
Yeah, that's it.
So basically I will condemn everybody that leaves the group.
Why?
Because deep down inside, they're terrified to do it myself.
Or I will condemn the group.
Why?
Because deep down inside, I'm incapable of living without a people.
I just find it intolerable.
So basically people end up adopting the views based on the underlying kind of notions that are unwholesome.
Either fear, or hate, or lust, or whatever.
Oh, or like, oh, I've long been going to the level of the Mahadevastani.
Because the community is good.
It's good to help people.
It's good.
And deep down inside, I'm simply afraid to go without food.
Sometimes it can be as simple as that.
I'm afraid that my food will be too rough on the mountain.
So I'll find every single justification to stay in the monastery.
Including meeting people, distractions, engagements, duties, sense of importance, sense of accomplishment, sense of career, sense of whatever else.
And again, I met quite a fair deal of other people who know being a monk is about living alone in the forest and doing this.
Why?
Because they have such serious issues that they can't stand.
Anyone, no matter how kind, good they are to them.
They just pure hatred towards another.
So the only way for me to remain in this kind of setting that I sort of ended up in
is to run away from everybody and hide in the forest and just keep it to a bare minimum meeting with others because I just can't stand it.
And I don't have to do it.
But I just lose my composition every single time.
Yet externally, you can paint either of those.
I'm also mean that's awesome.
No.
But I said you live in the forest.
Well, he said something else in conjunction with that.
He said only those who are ready to live in the forest should live in the forest.
I said, you're going to say you should keep it in the community. He said, yes, he said only those who are kind of capable of keeping it in the community should keep it in the community.
So he did not adopt a law that kind of overrides everything else regardless of the actual particular circumstances.
And that's why he wouldn't have made all those tangos mandatory.
And when they were not as requested, they didn't know.
A railroad should be mandatory. He came from one board should be mandatory. He said, no, let those from one over there go where that goes.
Let those who don't want to do it don't want to do it.
And whether they want to do it or not want to do it should be determined through their understanding of awesome and awesome.
So the person who understood awesome is an awesome will want awesome.
And being an ascetic is not necessarily awesome for everyone because people can do it from very wrong reasons.
Yeah, yeah.
But they're basically standardly, one starts them. I want to be free from suffering.
I can't do it too much, pay attention or give in to the last four green hand people to do it.
So you can find that exactly that thing to the extent whereby you have inspiration to go out of the monastery and live in the mountains.
And then you recognize it.
It's not necessarily coming out of unwholesome, but it's coming out of well intoxication that came with inspiration.
And you realize well, there might be a great deal of delusion involved in this because I'm not acting out of genuine recognition that this will be good for me.
I'm acting because I'm so inspired and full of energy to do it.
So you take it cautiously.
So you go halfway up the mountain, so I have to speak and see if that's bringing awesome to increase, unwholesome to decrease, or all the way around.
If it's all the way around, we'll go back and restart it another time.
But also it clears up the quote when you have the question, what should I do?
Well, exactly.
I don't do those. That's what I'm intending on with people talking. So whatever I do.
So it's not bad to have sexual intercourse, not bad to have a wife, not bad to have kids.
No, it's not. Depending on what you want to do.
Depending on what you want to do.
People think in terms of the eternal judgement, this is bad, this is good.
It depends on what you want to do.
Yeah, killing is always bad.
Breaking five precepts is always bad.
That's why it's the basic requirement that distinguishes humans from animals if they stick to it.
So there are those in there.
But let me ask you further on.
Well, I'm not judging people who are families and I want to leave it.
I'm just saying that if this is what you want to do, well, that contradicts it.
So you can't have it both ways.
I'm generally in practitioner with a teaching and at the same time, being engaged in a sexual intercourse,
whatever, will you not?
Because the Buddha said himself, you can't have it both.
So that's exactly the thing.
It's more like you recognize for yourself whether the things you want to do, your choices, your intentions,
even the way you attend to things.
I've been rooted in lust, awareness, delusion or not.
But some of you must.
Externally, that's irrelevant.
Like there is a basis of the five precepts or eight precepts later on.
But then everything else in between can be very good and very bad externally.
But internally, actually, you are the only one that would know.
Oh no, it's good.
It's good to go.
It's good to sit on a group retreat.
That's something.
I'm necessarily.
I would say it's like a...
Yeah, I want to be...
I want to give a craving for another person.
I want to give up craving for sexual activity.
But I'm just not ready for that right now.
Maybe in the future.
You chose to not be ready.
You chose to...
That to be the case.
And sometimes, you know, things...
Again, it depends on what you attend.
Like things you get very subtle.
So, it's not necessarily bad.
Or rather, it's not necessarily an awesome, but it can be an awesome.
So, say you're hungry.
So, you need the food in order to not die.
But then, at the same time, you choose only the food that you like.
So, you're...
So, you're clearly, basically, acting out of lust for tasters.
That kind of also implies eating the food.
But that's why you should, like, attend carefully.
Like, we know the contemplation that we chant in the morning
back in the monastery.
Like, the reason why you eat.
Like, okay, there's no question you abstain from sex.
You abstain from killing. You're safe from lying.
But you can't abstain from eating because you'll die.
So, you have to eat.
Then you can say, well, I will only...
Only things I don't like.
Well, that's not...
That's, again, putting on an external decision.
Because if you do only what you don't like,
then you might start liking torturing yourself.
You might start enjoying that unhulsingly.
Hence, there won't be any wisdom arising.
No, so you just want to make sure that while you're eating,
you make sure that your act of eating
doesn't get rooted in an awesome denial for the pleasant taste.
So then you won't be running away from nice food that you like,
that you liked, but you won't be affected by it.
That's the thing.
Because people think, oh, I really want to eat dish A
on a kind of dish B, which I don't really like.
So I should really go with what I don't like.
But that's just like projecting it externally.
Like putting responsibility on that which you don't like.
Saying, I will choose what I don't like.
Sure, you can do it once or twice.
But sooner or later, you will get dependent on the view
to always do the opposite of what you want to do.
I, you will become dependent on the view
to torture yourself, to cause, to intentionally flick paint you.
So, sooner or later, you can't sustain it.
But what you want to do basically is recognize I have to eat.
So whether it dish A or B doesn't matter.
I prefer dish A to dish B.
I might eat both and then remain mindful in terms of the dish B
to not be hating and thinking about dish A while I meet in dish B.
And at the same time while I meet in dish A,
to not be like, well, overjoyed on account of it
or careless in regard to the experience of taste of the dish A.
So you may be mindful in regard to both tastes because you have to eat.
And above all, you remain mindful as to why you have to eat
in order to sustain the body.
If that thought, literally, if that thought remains established in you,
you will not overdo the joy when it comes to the dish you like.
Nor will you be too concerned when it comes to dish you don't like.
Why? Because the point is to eat whatever.
And you remain rooted in that.
True mindfulness means there won't be any rise given to the other person.
You canlessly attend to what you are eating.
You forget why you are eating or rather you forget to root things
in the right reasons for eating.
You will inevitably be taken by what?
By the senses. You will be taken by that which is the strongest,
which is the pull of the taste.
So that's why the same act of eating can be rooted in completely
and you're responsible for that.
So you don't have to.
And when you start losing yourself properly and establishing from that,
then you wouldn't care as the Buddha said.
Like I have disciples who live only on one land full of rice every second day.
While at that time, I would be eating like the finest curry.
And I would sometimes eat a bowl full to the brim with the food.
And then I would have another one.
So he would eat two arms bowls to the brim of the nicest food.
While he has disciples who live on a handful of rice,
if there was the goal of practice to live and have,
they would not be respecting him any in any way whatsoever.
But the goal of the practice is to not be affected by the food,
to not be affected by the senses,
to not be rooted in unwholesome based on the pull of the senses.
That's the goal of the practice.
So whether it's a present taste, touch, sounds, maison,
it will not pull you into unwholesome.
That's the goal of the practice.
When you establish that, then you can eat whatever.
You establish the principle and then you're not pulled.
So then, yeah, the Buddha can have the finest silk robes
and three bowls of food in front of him if he wants.
And you'll still respect him as much as you did on the first day
when he was just living as an ascetic.
Now when he's found frequented by the kings,
and you'll respect him.
In the same sense, why?
Because you know where the goal is,
and you understood what his teaching was,
and that teaching freed you from suffering.
So you might choose to live under a little tree
enjoying one handful of rice every three days,
because you don't need more,
and that's what makes you happy and content,
and not disturbed and peaceful.
Yet you'll still respect him while he lives in a palace.
Because that was never the point of the practice.
Yeah, the external.
Yeah, it's good.
Every teacher says it's very similar thing about food.
Being at a banquet tonight.
Food that comes your way.
You just take up what you need.
If you don't like to call and grab a piece more than you.
You happen to come across,
that like showers' food comes,
happens to be in your head.
You have it because you need to eat.
Yeah.
If it's very low food, just like that.
And if you don't know,
just reestablish the mindfulness into why you need to eat,
and keep that thought while you're eating.
For as long as that thought is present while you're eating,
no matter to what degree it's present,
sometimes more, sometimes less,
feel establishing the mindfulness.
And as an anchor,
you're beating for the right reasons,
no matter what.
And that's, you know,
I remember I met people amongst
who, obviously,
a big downer,
loads of food.
I had 50 dishes.
And then,
instead of taking responsibility
for the fact that you have to eat,
and then eating what, you know,
you find agreeable,
not necessarily always what you really, really like,
but say, you know,
I don't like certain things,
but I'll take them.
Because I learned that they're very nutritional,
that they can keep me going further.
So I would have to eat less.
You go for that even if you don't like.
Sometimes I find out that this really thing
that I really happen to like.
I really, I love the taste of that.
It's also very, very good for you.
I'll take that.
I will not forget why I need to eat.
But then those monks
would not necessarily think like,
well, they would not descend to their level,
so they would recognize the problem of preference.
The kind of preference is not a problem,
but preference in juicing last is a problem.
But instead of recognizing that
it's taking up responsibility for it,
they try to deny it.
So they would either always take what they don't like.
I always take what I want less.
That means, okay, so you're basically attributing
choice to the view of going after
that which is less desirable.
I am not responsible.
There are three choices.
I'll go for the one I least want.
But that's already something you've chosen beforehand.
But now you're attributing it.
And then I even make some months for like,
saying, I will take only every third dish,
whatever that dish might be.
Which means, so now you're attributing
responsibility to the chance.
See, all of that is irrelevant, actually,
if they were to remain mindful as to why they're eating.
But clearly, the failure of putting an importance
of how the dishes are chosen
means they're not mindful when they were eating.
Why? Because, hey, I didn't choose out of my preference.
I've chosen out of this every third dish algorithm
that I wrote.
Thus, I can forget about because now it's fine.
Whatever I hate my ball, it's fine.
None of it is fine.
That's how you should start.
No food is fine to eat.
Good or bad?
You only have to eat because you want to survive.
And if you keep that, then you wouldn't care
what food is in your bowl,
whether it's tasty or not.
Because you realize none of it is fine.
But they all come from the point of view that food is fine.
There's a somewhere that is a bigger problem than the other.
Then you try to avoid by choosing the opposite.
Point being, none of that would actually be a problem for them.
If they were to remain mindful
why they're eating as to why.
Why they're eating as to why they're eating.
Hungry food, though.
This is impossible to eat without giving in
to the sense domain of taste,
to the animal that pertains to that domain, to that pool.
But what can do is keep it in check.
I let it eat because it needs to eat.
But I'll keep it in check as to how grounded
I'll change it to the reason why I'm eating.
Which is to sustain this body no more.
So on some days they will be food that their animal likes.
The sense of taste finds it agreeable.
They find it disagreeable.
But you won't be bothered by going through all this effort
of always finding a disagreeable taste.
Because you realize agreeable, disagreeable both are on the same domain.
And that's not the problem.
The problem is that that was affected by it.
And you can be equally affected by disagreeable.
Because sometimes if you don't,
like if you always go around choosing the disagreeable taste,
sometimes you're presented by tastes
and none of them is disagreeable.
What are you going to choose then?
Then you won't be able to not be affected by a agreeable taste.
Because you were running away from it into disagreeable.
Which was also the level of taste.
So you don't care about a agreeable taste or disagreeable taste.
You care about the nature of taste affecting you.
And that can be undone or that can be accomplished.
Not being affected by that can be accomplished simply.
But remaining mindful as to why do you need,
why you need to give in to the taste in the first place.
Big agreeable, disagreeable, neutral.
And when you keep mind, when you develop enough mindfulness
in regard to that, then you wouldn't care what you're eating.
You wouldn't care what you're choosing.
You wouldn't care how you're choosing.
You wouldn't care if somebody else puts the food in your bowl
or if you're going to put the food in your bowl.
You wouldn't care if you're just going to choose the agreeable taste.
Because you're not affected by agreeable,
none more than you're affected by disagreeable.
You know, you'll be on both.
And then you won't be overeating.
Out of indulgence, you won't be under eating.
Under eating, you will just be eating.
