Well, the thing was, what is choice?
I was going to say, what chooses, why do I tend to this site?
Why is there a tension to it?
Well, that's the same, asking why, it's the same type of question.
I thought you just, you know, in regard to the licenses.
Why, and who chooses and stuff, all those assumptions placed in the faith,
do you confuse them in regard to choice?
Because there is choice.
There is choice.
There is a tension.
There is a tension.
And there is intention in regards to you.
Okay.
If I take it, if I sit by, if I'm aware of myself,
plus I'm seeing intention,
thoughts, thinking about, I'm going to do this, do that.
And I'm also seeing what I'm attending to,
when I'm seeing intention.
That's also the better practice to see that.
Well, it is, but it's separate things.
Yeah.
Most likely that, which you think yourself is in that setup,
won't be really yourself.
It would be your idea for yourself was,
if the time you thought of it.
Because yourself, that's what we meant before.
If you are able to choose, will, intend,
without inducing sense of iron,
through that choice, will, or intention,
well, you'll be an online, or, on the way, to be one.
Which is why, again, mindfulness,
of breathing on a punasati, is told to sort upon us.
Nobody shorter than that can really understand it,
and do it properly.
But if there is a right view,
then bringing that sense of,
I am choosing, I am willing,
I am doing like this, I am doing like that,
makes you include yourself always,
and not exclude, and make it kind of,
disappear in the background.
So then, that mindfulness,
and that discernment, applies to it.
So what you want to do,
you can't just directly start seeing yourself choosing,
because yourself will step outside of that,
and take it as yours.
In other words, you won't be a sense of self,
if you think that's what.
So what you want to do is,
recognizing the inevitability of the choice,
you have to go the indirect way,
realize that, well,
you can but not choose,
and whatever you do,
that's choice.
So you're actually not free,
in regard to choice.
You might be free to choose what you want,
particularly,
but you're not free to not choose at all.
So in that recommendation,
that's what it contains,
the understanding that,
even the most volitional act and choice,
cannot be actually taken as yours.
Because they fully depend upon it.
Well, they're given beforehand,
as the actual thing,
as the possibilities.
You can't choose something
out of nothingness.
It's only that implicit.
Even if it's a Reynolds spontaneous act,
it's implicit as such,
and that's why you could have attended it
and choose to do it.
Choosing to do it.
So indirectly,
you have to kind of hollow it out,
so to speak,
until the thing is not being fed anymore
through the false assumption,
to the right assumption of,
I am choosing this.
And then, yet, the choice remains,
the preferences remain,
but they're not being fed anymore,
and they don't spread,
they don't proliferate,
three minutes.
So it's like a palm stump.
You destroy the roots.
You're not modifying choices,
you're not trimming the branches,
like, garnishing the tree or whatever else.
No, you recognize the problem is in the roots.
They are feeding this whole proliferation of their tree.
So you kill the roots.
And then, whatever,
whichever way it evolves and grows,
it stays,
and the point is,
it won't go further.
It doesn't matter how it stays.
Which is why our arms can still have habits and stuff like that.
External habits.
But now we're being fueled
and fed through the roots
and free the very illusion.
So when you're fully aware,
Markful of your body again.
If you're mindful of the body
as a thing out there in the world
because of which your whole experience
recognizes,
and any choice you make,
without actually making any specific choice,
is then included in that.
You realize that,
without fire or awareness of mindfulness,
it will always remain determined
by this living body out there.
Because if the body is dead,
this cannot stand.
And that already includes the nature
of the choice within that.
So you have to stop like that.
When that view gets established,
then you have to kind of go within that
and clear out all of the residues inside.
But first you have to start from the outside,
which is why it's sort of when it still has conceit
and so on that he needs to kind of purify later.
But he doesn't have that general
fundamental wrong view.
So the starting point is that,
seeing that with general awareness.
To general experience,
the experiences are all seen determined by the body.
In the same sense,
as we spoke before, the dead body
would not be even discernible as such
if there is no general experience
and consciousness in regard to it.
So it's not that just everything stands upon the body
and their bodies are living in the world,
independent.
That body, other in the world,
is actually determined by this mind
that depends upon the dead body.
But, you know,
looks and puts on this.
It's now a rupamian,
but as I said before,
it's that matter out in the world
with the consciousness out there,
with that matter
that your experience exists as such,
consciousness is not in your head,
it's equally external out there.
But the consciousness is out there.
Where matter is in matter.
So you discern consciousness
based on where matter is discerned to be,
because that actual matter is inaccessible.
As I said before,
when you think of the four elements,
well, that's your thought.
It stands for that which four elements is.
If it actually stands for
what the nature of the four great elements is,
means you're not conceiving them,
that thought is the correct thought,
thus you have understood,
thus they don't find the footing
in your experience anymore,
so you can say the four great elements
have ceased in an hour and a half.
But if your thought,
the presentation or the Dharma
of phenomena where you want to call it,
stands for something
that's assumed to be matter.
In other words, stands wrongly,
misrepresent that which is matter.
That means,
are you have conceived it?
You have conceived the matter.
The matter found footing,
and that's why the whole world exists for you.
Which is more party answered.
No, but knowing that whatever I think
is only a thought.
Well, yeah.
No, that matter is unthinkable.
Knowing that which you think is only a thought
and the matter is unthinkable,
and knowing that also is a thought
that doesn't stand for that matter.
And that matter,
that I just said,
is also a thought.
So any possibility
and more and more peripheral
of the peripheral thought
in regard to your current thought
or in regard to your current thought
in regard to your earlier,
doesn't stand for that matter anymore.
Not just actual thought,
but the whole peripheral thought
doesn't represent it either.
Then you can say,
you've fully approved your buildings.
You don't conceive of an initial form
far near directing.
Anyhow.
I can agree.
But then, say, well,
so it's only my head.
Yeah.
Well, would that, again?
Okay, sure. In a way it is all in your head, but would your head be there?
If you are not discerning it, if you are not thinking of it as my head, you wouldn't.
And then your reckon as well, would it be even able to think any of that?
If this body, this material body out there is not living and breathing, you wouldn't.
So then, yeah, it's all in your head, for as long as your body is alive.
The body is destroyed, the matter is taken away. There is no more head.
There is no more mind. So I reckon as well, actually, my mind, the experience as a whole,
not image-generally mental, whatever, doesn't, it doesn't actually, it's not independent.
So, and that's usually about statement, it's all in my head, implies.
Me and everything else, kind of basically, I am the most fundamental.
But if you recognize, sure, I am most important mental, and then you take that thought
and recognize it as determined by the fact that matter is there inaccessible.
But you know, you can know that, because if something happens to that matter, everything is gone.
And you can know that, and you know that.
So knowing that long enough, will bring further recognition, and then, even if you have a thought
it's all in my head, you don't take that as me and mine.
Because you know that's a permanent.
Oh, everything is thought, yeah.
And the thought, the nature of thought, is able to manifest itself because matter is there present alive.
That gets destroyed, which is another thought.
So, but that's another thought in regard to matter that's present alive, while I'm still alive,
which is another thought, which is another thought, which, and yeah, it's infinite.
There is one, because you can never reach a matter.
But through that infinity, if you want to pursue it or not, you can know, okay,
I'm able to go in this any infinite direction, for as long as that which is matter stays.
If that which is matter gets destroyed, the only thing that is gone, which is what I meant.
When I said, how am I going to put it?
When eternal, infinite is not confused with permanent and self.
Because infinite, it's like eternity.
You can go forever, for as long as the matter stands.
The matter is removed, the whole of the matter is gone, inconceivable.
Let's put myself to come back to compensate myself.
Well, in a way you do, which is why it has to be taken on artificially,
like a graph, as in a bit I said, the right view.
And then if you do long enough, because, or if, you took it right me,
and if it corresponds to the way things actually are, then yeah,
it will take, it will take the proper root, and then you can see it for yourself as being it confirmed.
But you won't see it naturally, because I mean you can find your own way out of ignorance.
That's why it's taken right conviction, that's right view.
But there is the assumption in every protrusion in different degrees,
that things will happen naturally.
You practice, and then you feel this thing unraveling.
Like, oh, it happened, I got it, or now it's clear.
Those are kind of very general descriptions, but they usually take it to the wrong thing.
You want it to happen, you want enlightenment to be found,
and then it's all an easy ride afterwards.
No, you need to convince yourself.
I said, well, it's not real, if I convince myself.
Well, what makes you think that your criteria, what's real, what's not real, is correct.
What protrusion I think is real is itself.
So you might not go so cruelly, and think, oh, I am, I'm in town, or whatever,
but still, for as long as you know, it's protrusion of the human.
You think, this is real, that's not real.
Means, this is more important, that's less important.
Means, I don't actually know, important, that's important,
unimportant, is unimportant.
Which is why there was a sort of another verse,
says, knowing, important, is important, unimportant, is unimportant.
Getting that criteria.
And you get criteria, if you convince yourself, to such an extent,
the recognition takes place.
So, yeah, there is a form of natural, unveiling, then, but not before.
Which is why, as I said, the Buddha will always make such exclamations,
like a warrior who won by himself,
I've done this, like whatever was to be achieved by my manly effort,
but my, I've done it.
Nobody else had any input.
No luck, no circumstances.
I've made the effort, and I got it.
I worked through this conviction, until I've seen it.
And now I'm sure.
I had faith that the conviction was right, so I was convincing myself.
Now I've seen it, and it's right, I don't need to convince myself anymore.
And I certainly don't have faith.
I have confidence, because I know that it's right.
Sounds insane.
Sounds fundamentalist. Sounds like mad.
Which is exactly how Buddha saw it in the first time,
when he met the ascetic.
He says, I am self-in-lightened.
Nobody, I absolutely know the teacher.
I'm the greatest, I'm this, I'm that.
And this was a so big friend, and walked off.
Because he was all true.
Well, he said, but obviously, then he realized, well, he found to teach.
I need to find a slightly more relatable approach,
that will not induce kind of resistance in people.
Thinking you're all conceit, but it's all fact.
So do I.
That what we had on the monument in Skraj.
I've gone beyond the widows of the river.
I'm my own guide.
Cannot be, cannot be guided.
Not even I don't want to.
It's impossible for me to be guided by another.
It's that level.
Oh, that's just fundamentalist.
That's just wrong.
That's just fixed view.
Every views are fixed view.
You want to get the right fix.
So I want to make sure that your convictions are correct,
for as correct as they can be.
So you really want to emphasize the discernment, reasoning, reflection.
Because as you can see, you don't really know what you're convincing yourself,
whether it's right or wrong.
If it's right, you recognize it.
That's right.
You try to respond to the right things and then you'll see through it.
But if it ain't, it means you're going to wind yourself further and further and further into ignorance.
So yeah, it's a very risky thing.
But you're ignorant anyway.
So not trying it is even more foolish,
than at least attempting to break out.
It could be a lot of faith to commit the view of our world.
I don't hold many fixed views.
Well, that's a fixed view for you.
They should have fused responsibility for it.
And that's even worse.
Yeah, the point is that freedom comes off from it.
There is a...
That's what you can do.
A form of measuring, once you start practicing, yeah.
There are some tokens and little hints that can be,
okay, I might be on the right way.
And that's why they wouldn't explain the four stages and the fetters that have been through reviewing those.
You get the pointers.
Oh, I might flee from doubt.
I would be free from self-view, I would be free from holding onto virtue and duty.
Keep reviewing that.
Understanding what those are means.
You'll be free from that.
For us, it's keeping in light of those things that are causing suffering.
Well, no, holding onto the self-use, what causes suffering,
well, it makes your mind able to suffer in good ways, trying it.
But you wouldn't be able to say, well,
you're kind of trying to practice, look at these things, look at these things.
And then one day, as well, I am...
Is it working?
Well, I'm happy enough.
I'm happier than I was.
Yeah, but are you a centre-party?
I don't know, but I'm happier.
Well, exactly.
Which means you settled for less, or basically settled for nothing.
Because you would know.
It's like what is.
Basically, putugina is in a trend that's about the crash,
and centre-party thinks you are to the crash called together.
Which you just refer to, well, I'm happier,
means you just got upgraded in a fancy compartment.
That's still going to crash.
So ultimately, it actually makes no difference.
Which you want to be is out of that training.
That's the way you would know it.
Is that something you would know exactly?
Yeah.
Because if you have doubt in regard to it, it means up, you know, free from doubt.
Which means that you definitely, not free from that factor,
which means you cannot be a sort of fan.
Obviously, so you can get people who get so convinced themselves,
but it's easy to under that.
You know, you would see the need.
Like, you know, I understood just a challenge of you or two of theirs,
and you'll see the need to maintain the grip on the view.
Because it's existential dependence.
But then you can't really do much for them,
because if they were able to convince themselves
to let extent to believe something that they're not,
it means they're deeply rooted into bad faith.
And the authenticity has to be the first point.
You really want to do it for yourself,
and completely, like, nobody else.
Really, for me, concerning only me.
So, lying to yourself, just so that others will recognize themselves,
or lying to yourself through the others by others,
or, oh, yeah, yeah, like, that's a security in that they're the basic one,
and you will know what you're doing.
And if you're honest in that level, you wouldn't do it.
Suffering and freedom from it.
That's the goal, that's the criteria, that's the measurement.
Nothing else is accepted as compromise.
I told you that when I was back in Serbia,
and then, you know, you go on,
you get all sorts of Buddhist books and texts or whatever else.
I was reading everything.
And I came across, and then, you know,
sort of by my sacrilegomy and contemplating all that.
And then I came across this eye, came article,
where she says, about sort of the party.
Oh, great.
Because I was just looking for anyone's input.
I wanted to learn more, I think it was before, actually,
yeah, way before I came across Nihirah.
And she said,
oh, we are basically, we are already sort of partners.
That's great, very fortunate.
And my first of all was, wow, I'm sort of a partner name.
So I continue reading, and she says,
she explains how we're sort of partners.
Well, basically, we all know the power into the shrines
and stages in English.
So we are all free from rights and rituals.
Are we? Yeah, yeah.
Show hands, we are.
Then we all know that
that the Buddha was right.
So we have no doubt in regards to his teaching,
he is up to you to accept it.
Yeah, we're free from doubt.
And we all know that self doesn't really exist.
Modern science is proven, the molecules are constantly changing.
There is no substance to it.
Yep.
Yep, we agree.
So we are all sort of partners.
And they're thinking, okay, I'm a sort of partner.
And then immediately, next thought, well,
what difference does he make?
If that's what sort of a body is,
what difference does that make?
I don't care.
Because I wasn't concerned about becoming a sort of partner
or whatever, I was concerned about being suffering
and free and fluid.
So, sure, you can have the whole Buddhist world
recognize you as a sort of partner.
If you are eternally not free from suffering,
it's irrelevant.
Unless you were never actually about free and fluid suffering,
but you were about to recognition.
You felt lonely, you felt inadequate,
you never loved you or whatever else.
But you have to be honest with yourself
and practice for the right reasons.
That's what Buddha said.
The downer own has only one taste,
same like the sea, has the taste of salt.
Downer has the taste of freedom from suffering.
That's it.
Can't do it for any other reason.
And why would you?
So, that's exactly the thing.
Oh, well, yeah, okay.
According to this, I'm an oven.
What difference does he make?
I'm not free from suffering.
That's what my concern is.
And that's what my athletes are applied to.
But then, obviously, you did what Buddha said.
And so, the one is the one who is free from suffering
to a great deal,
and those that we see are from pro-number shoots,
and we're just up, I can run.
And then, okay, so if she was wrong,
it means that the views that she used
to describe these three factors are also wrong,
which means, okay,
so what does really freedom from virtue and duty mean?
Because, clearly,
if what I think it means,
unless that thought makes me so different,
it makes me so different, and it means that thought is wrong.
So, that's what I meant when I said,
by understanding what the factors are,
you abandon them.
There is no discrepancy, there is no delay.
So, would you say that freedom, virtue and duty?
Well, for as long as you think,
did your good virtue
and sense of duty,
I'm a monk, I need to meditate, I need to do this.
Any, like the nature of duty,
the nature of virtue,
as long as you think,
as long as you hold that
to pertain to the practice,
means you're holding on to it.
Because Dhamma is completely different from that.
There is no wrongful virtue, Dhamma.
There is no Dhamma without virtue,
but virtue is not the Dhamma.
As they said,
when they were saying,
what should we recite first?
Story is concerning sealer,
or the story is concerning the Dhamma.
He said, well,
there is no Dhamma without sealer.
So, let's recite that first,
and then they decided that the sutra
to be regarded.
But, they knew the Dhamma is not that.
So,
it's almost,
well, what does that mean?
I can go and do everything.
No.
You can't do everything
which you want,
also, and also, because
saying that Dhamma is not virtue,
is not like saying Dhamma is
un-virtual.
Is that a word?
Un-virtual?
Un-virtuals.
Un-virtuals.
Can you say that?
Anyway, you get it.
Because that's people's assumption.
Good means Dhamma.
But if you say, no,
there is no wrongful good in Dhamma.
So, Dhamma is bad.
No, there is no wrongful bad either.
So, that's what means
dropping,
thinking about Dhamma.
People usually translate it
as rights and rituals.
You can place it down.
Dhamma makes you
enables you to relate to it.
Oh, yeah.
Bowing to a shrine doesn't mean anything.
It's much softer than that.
Why?
Because if stopping,
if not bowing to a shrine,
is required to bend in the fetter well,
most of the monks, well,
many more would have been so advanced.
But it's softer than that.
It's actually
silver,
butter,
paramasa.
It's silver.
It's the same word.
It's not a bit from me.
It means virtue.
Virtue and duty.
It feels, again,
with trying to purify.
But there is no Dhamma without virtue in Dhamma.
Dhamma is not virtue in Dhamma.
But you have to restrain yourself.
Have to restrain yourself first,
and then you might say,
when you see it,
you'll see that it's not very strange.
It's not very strange either.
Because you can never,
if you're just straining,
you'll always be restraining yourself, right?
Because it's not pointed.
What is there?
Well, you're straining so much
where you can never,
you're so virtuous,
you don't think anything
planned there.
And that will,
that won't result in Dhamma.
But won't you?
That's the thing.
Because people think
if I'm just virtuous enough,
I'll see the Dhamma.
Not necessarily.
It's a basis.
But if you don't pull anything
on the basis,
it remains just a basis.
So what's your
and restrain yourself
like a raft?
So if you don't use the raft,
it doesn't mean anything.
Yeah, I suppose, yeah.
I mean, it came like,
what I think I said that before.
It's like a fertile field.
But if you don't pull any seeds,
it's just a fertile field.
You can't expect,
you know,
wrapping the fruit.
There isn't any,
because you haven't planted it.
But then eating the fruit,
yeah, you wouldn't be there
without the field.
But it's certain.
You're not the soil and the field
and the field,
because you're eating
one little bit of the thing.
There wouldn't be there
without the field,
but it's clearly not the field.
How long does it take
to become virtuous enough?
As long as necessary.
Like some people
can do it, you know,
you know, in half a night.
So people, like, again,
some people can do it just after speaking
with Buddha for a while.
The mind will be virtuous enough
for them to get a right view.
But that's because
they would have the right
destruction
without any kind of
frequency and notions
obstructing it.
It's a virtue not to just be straight.
Well, the restraint
is supposed to bring the state of mind.
Which is the virtue of state of mind.
Virtues and like,
like, behavior and attitude.
It's like a recognition.
Oh, it's, I've been engaging
in the virtue of behavior.
It's a recognition.
So it does take some time.
So you can get, yeah.
So as I said,
some people can get established
upon that recognition quickly,
upon one virtuous act.
Some people need more.
Today I think most people need
much more.
Much more time.
Yeah, much more of virtuous acts
in order to get the recognition
of a phenomenon of virtue
that you're established upon.
But then if you do practice
something that goes
in a completely different direction,
because if you were and means
you could do the dharma,
means there would be
a set of prescribed,
rights, rituals, duties,
methods, techniques,
with personal retreats
that could lead you to dharma.
A mere performance,
mechanical performance,
or something could lead you
to the dharma,
but it can't.
Because dharma doesn't pretend to
it.
So,
whatever.
It just,
why does virtue,
why does virtue have to
be the baseline?
Why not?
Why is it relevant?
Why is virtue relevant?
So, is that question relevant?
Anyway, I can answer it.
Back onto the similarly
of going out on the motorway
in a pursuering of senses,
in exposing yourself
to accidents
or a chopping block
or whatever else.
Same note to it,
by default.
Is it better than saying yes?
If there is a danger
involved in it?
Yes.
So, it's better to say no.
It's better to restrain.
That's why virtue is better.
Because you don't know why,
but through doing it,
it prevents,
but it prevents the more immediate
demise.
Well, you know this trouble
in that regard you get this.
If you don't restrain yourself.
Yeah.
Things that could happen.
But it goes,
it doesn't just concern the
bodily behavior of those who
end to the mind.
It works for the mind.
It's just subtler,
but it's the same principle.
By letting mind go
onto the domain that doesn't own,
you're taken by it.
By saying no,
it means you remain out of it.
By remaining out of it,
it means you can see it eventually.
Not if you're engaged.
That's what Buddha made me say.
There is no,
it's impossible to engage
in a central act without
having your mind being taken
by those central perceptions.
You can't,
or I'm free from
sensuality yet,
I'm doing central acts.
Basically,
it's impossible.
You just cannot,
cannot occur.
So that's why.
The person who is not
virtuous,
means their minds,
their mind are assumed
in those domains.
They can't get a perspective
on it if he is in it.
It's really not jealous.
Oh, no.
There's no question of that.
Then,
abandoning self identity.
Is that just,
you have to see self?
Yes, it is the first thing.
So when your general behaviour
is not engaging in things
that are compromising
the perspective
on your general behaviour,
you can start seeing that,
well,
simultaneous kind of determination
or rather dependence
of your general behaviour
upon this random body.
But while you engage
in random body attacks
with last version delusion
without any mindfulness,
you can't see anything.
Your audio attention is.
Yes.
Basically, you sink
into a hole,
and you can't expect to kind of
maintain the vision
of the whole lifestyle.
It's just, you can't.
So by restraining first,
in order to get the perspective,
you get the perspective.
Then you see the place of restraint.
You see the place of duty,
which means you don't
hold onto it,
blinded anymore,
which means you're free.
You can see about it,
but not so.
And then, you don't have to
be restraining that.
But you will,
because that's now
the established normal behaviour.
And also,
because you recognise
it's more
less hassle,
and more pleasant
to be restrained.
Like, the joy of renunciation
replaces the joy of
essential indulgence.
But it's again,
any further you have.
You have to.
Here is our view
for that.
You can't just
feel pure restraint.
I mean, you can
keep telling yourself,
but you won't take root
because it's not enough.
But if you get that general perspective,
you see that
whatever choice you make
made will make
your general experience,
your experience as a
hold is fully dependent
upon this random physical body
right here,
right now,
that's the most
close to you.
I mean, there's this body,
there are these bodies.
There's no difference
between them.
There are bodies.
In those bodies there,
internally, externally,
externally, externally,
in bodies are there.
It's just that this particular
body is closer
to the general experience as a hold,
determines it more
than these bodies.
But none of it can be
mine to begin with.
So getting that kind of
perspective
means good or bad,
good and bad,
neutral,
both,
whatever,
it's implemented
because it's within that,
cannot escape,
cannot spill or
cannot step outside.
So it's completely different
than just doing good.
It's absolutely nothing.
You abandon good.
Inasmuch your abandon
bad.
But in order to do so,
you need to be established
upon good.
And why is it good?
Because at least,
you don't know why,
but by doing good,
no bad means at least,
you're kind of
don't step into that domain
where you fully lose control,
fully lose perspective,
fully taking bad.
You don't take the bad,
basically.
That's why it's good.
Because it says,
no, you don't even know
that it's bad.
But by adopting attitude
of saying no to it,
you don't take it.
And later on,
you find out that
there is actually poison in it.
As a simile,
I just switched to the
handless engine,
that the poison is drink
in terms of the
essential pleasure.
Pleasant,
pleasing in every sense,
side smell,
texture and everything.
But you know,
now that there is a poison to it.
Because in the beginning,
why am I saying no to this?
It's just pleasure.
It's innocent.
It's nice.
It's beautiful.
Whatever else.
The whole world does it.
Why do I have to say no?
You don't know that.
Because if you would,
you'd be free from it.
But you're taking a trust,
it's better to say no.
And you ask,
why is it better?
And I say,
because you don't consume it.
Just,
you don't know why it's better
not to consume it.
Later on,
when you find out,
you can find out only
because you haven't been consuming it.
That's the effort that's very strange.
Afterwards, yes.
After there is no restraint,
it's understanding,
which is why I cannot engage
in a sexual intercourse,
or any central act.
It's just inconceivable.
He's not restraining himself,
really kind of trying hard
and after doing it,
and he can't even conceive to do it.
So that's why it's better not to do it.
Then after,
it becomes self-evident.
That's sort of how it sees that.
But he still is...
Yeah, he sees that in a general,
in a fundamental level,
but in a more particular level,
he still has more details.
He still has...
Yeah.
He can fall back into those things.
To the extent that he can't fall back
to the point of having a wrong view
of afterward anymore.
He can't,
which is why he's at most seven rivers.
But remember that sort of,
sometimes it's the second one,
that's it,
or the third one, that's it.
Seven at most,
but not necessarily all seven.
When it becomes upon landing,
and all those different kind of slightly,
slightly ambiguous descriptions.
See, it doesn't even get fully born as human.
It's upon landing to be able,
whatever it means,
he becomes...
He becomes an island.
So the violence abroad
doesn't need much to remember again.
Well, he might not...
He doesn't remember...
He might not remember particular things,
but the principles,
the potential of the nature of memory,
are there.
And he just needs to be alive.
And if he's not,
well, in the next life,
and he's at most seven nights,
a lot of times,
and those principles,
we kind of see back into whatever understanding he has.
Well, the natural incline,
is basically those principles,
are what he is.
So, yeah,
it will inevitably,
because that's the direction he is.
So,
when he wants to do this,
he'll be going that way,
eventually.
And no matter how,
in doubt, he can get,
and careless,
it's all, like,
just nothing,
in comparison.
He will arrive there.
But, yeah?
There is still some work to be done,
so there's no excuse for not doing it.
Which is why the boy would be urging,
Saikas,
to become an aunt,
says,
if there wouldn't be any work,
I wouldn't be telling him,
going to the work,
but because there is,
there's no need to do it.
So,
the thing,
I'm going to show you,
gaining perspective,
that this general awareness,
depends on this,
his particular body,
and then doing that,
and then seeing that,
is it,
well, you,
not entirely,
if you're suffering,
but there's a major shift,
you know,
it's longer,
it's subject to it,
something,
then you have no doubt,
if it goes
to what you've been doing,
at the same time.
You know,
once it works,
so there's different,
it's gone,
once it works.
And then you can't even conceive,
and the idea of a pamiro,
existing,
upon anywhere else,
different,
from your general experience,
as a whole,
depending upon this material,
organs,
which is also part of general experience,
as a whole,
as a form of designation,
these organs.
Just like that,
change where,
the general awareness,
how is that happening?
That's just an attention
to the whole.
Well, it's not happening,
it's already there.
You start back into it,
you recognize it.
The only reason you can reflect,
is because there are,
the nature of reflection is possible.
If there wouldn't be a place,
so,
it's not something else.
It's not something,
one, you do it,
by intending to go
that direction,
but that direction exists,
that's what your experience is.
So, general,
and particular,
actual and peripheral,
peripheral,
in general,
that's already there.
We're so used to being observed
in what's taking your attention,
actually, but now,
directly,
you don't see peripheral,
then you wonder,
how this peripheral comes,
no, that peripheral
is the basis for actual.
And in the same sense,
that peripheral is determined,
but then, which is not peripheral,
it's peripheral to this.
So, recognizing the phenomenon
of that peripheral means
developing mindfulness.
Like, let me how to see
without shifting
the original direction.
Let me how to see peripherally.
Because if I'm trying to do it,
that's it.
Well, if you try to do it,
if you're intending,
or are they over intending
in this case,
means you just shift
onto the new actual,
which means now peripheral
is different,
and you're not seeing it.
So, you see it
in the garden,
what you're seeing,
which is a form of seeing,
an indirect wear of seeing,
which is equally valid
where you're seeing.
You just got so used,
that staring directly,
to that became the norm
of existence and reality.
And if something is not there,
it doesn't exist.
It's a real.
In general awareness,
you said that,
what is another term for that word?
What do you mean?
I can't say,
do we have to flick mindfulness?
What does mindfulness
mean to we have to flick mindfulness?
In general awareness,
we set what is the
another term for that word
which we mean?
We have to flick mindfulness.
We have to flick mindfulness.
What do you mean?
Like I say, we have to reflect mindfulness.
Mindfulness is present.
So it's conscious.
Yeah, and that's right.
Mindfulness is established.
And you don't establish it by going from the deep inside of your head or whatever else.
You establish it by recognizing your general experience very well,
and I will speak fully determined by this positioned matter of your body on that chair,
while we're speaking, while you're asking these questions.
That body remains there seated, or whichever situation it's in.
And you have no control over the material aspect of that.
I mean, you have no control to such an extent that you can't even think matter.
You can think in regard to that which matter is.
And in that which you think the matter is in regard to which you're thinking,
that's also a thought.
That's how inaccessible elements are.
And consciousness is out there with an equally inaccessible.
And then you realize that whatever comes as a result of conscious matter,
namely feeling perception intentions are equally inaccessible.
So my sense of myself, me, volition, intention, determination, and of mine,
inconceivable to be mine.
Which is, remember we spoke about it a few days ago,
and said, well, it's so fundamentally inconceivable that, as I said,
it's actually nothing to grieve over.
It's impossible to even conceive an ocean of grief, sadness, over it.
Which is why, in that rudiment of the Buddha said,
there is the unborn, the un...
The unborn, the undetermined, the...
All of those, like, there is.
And that's that inaccessible thing.
Because if there wouldn't be, mebana is inaccessible.
It's real.
In every experience, in experience of a Buddhist,
no Buddhist pathogen, I don't, mebana is there.
It's just why it's fully understood or not.
If there wouldn't be inaccessible, means access would be there.
And freedom from it would not be possible.
But because there is an inaccessible, freedom from anything that you could have access before is possible.
And accessible is anything that appears.
Means you can access it, you can take it, you can appropriate it.
Hence, both age and death and so on.
As a result of it.
But if you fully understand that it's rooted
upon something you can't even think.
And you know that, means you know what inaccessible is,
without conceiving it in your thoughts.
It's absolutely like no room for emotion, it's just inconceivable.
Which is why it doesn't feel anything.
And that's how as well.
You can resolve upon that with wisdom long enough to become an event.
Because if you keep that image long enough, correctly,
without conceiving it, all of the factors will fall away.
Which is what sacred is supposed to do.
Not me, not mine, not I am.
Not ecstasy here, not ecstasy there.
Not assuming ecstasy, not ecstasy there.
That's what the element of nibbana, like nibbana dot, that's what it means.
It's there as a possibility, as an element.
It needs to be understood.
Yes, it needs to be understood.
And that's why you can conceal it as well.
And there's other symptoms.
It says, he thinks, oh, I am nibbana, I am entering nibbana.
That which he refers to is actually nibbana.
But he's not entering it or attaining it because he's thinking, I am.
He's conceiving it.
So it's nothing magical, it's nothing hidden in that sense.
Like, what you have is pathogen, it's five aggregates.
What she has done, it's five aggregates.
It's within that that the whole dumbbells can think.
It basically pertains to the way you take them or not.
The five aggregates.
And you take them, for as long as you don't fully understand
that there is impossible to take them in the first place.
They are inaccessible.
Not knowing they're inaccessible, you access them through that lack of knowledge.
So there is no room for it, but it has always been there.
So it's beginningless, but actually it's not supposed to be there.
It's not needed, it's not necessary.
It's a parasite, isn't it?
But beginningless.
It's something you knew before, because if you knew before,
you couldn't have fallen onto this not knowing.
Because once you know, you cannot not know anymore.
So this lack of knowledge is beginningless yet completely exaggerated.
Not knowing they're inaccessible, that's it.
And with general mindfulness, we can begin to recognize the conducts are inaccessible.
Well, you recognize that any thought, any notion, any thought, any designation,
no matter how subtle, how minimal, how general, how ambiguous,
you recognize it as such, but you recognize it as such.
You don't take it to stand, you don't take it to access that which is inaccessible,
which is back onto the principle of meditation I was telling you about before,
whatever arises you included.
You recognize it as such, and that's what I mean.
When you say, ah, the matter is inaccessible, that thought of that inaccessible matter
is also your thought, which you then think that matter to be,
so that matter has access to you or you access the matter.
So he conceives in matter, matter in me, I'm in matter, I'm in matter,
I'm right, he conceives matter.
But if you know that matter is inaccessible, and then that thought doesn't stand for that which matter is,
and that thought that says that which matter is also doesn't stand for that which matter is,
and that design to it.
So you leave that whole infinite kind of domain,
as well, sorry, you don't leave it, but you kind of understand that whole infinite domain
is basically inaccessible.
It cannot access matter, matter cannot access it.
No matter how far you go, what next thought comes,
it cannot stand for that which matter is,
because that's another thought of matter,
it can stand for what matter is.
So you realize whatever I think, quickly or slowly,
I'm bigurously, it will be under lower thought.
Thus, that which matter is cannot manifest itself in my thought,
because what I think are my thoughts,
which is why, what I perceive in my perception, what I feel in my feelings,
I don't feel my thoughts, I don't perceive my feelings.
That confusion means confusion in regard to the basic nature of phenomena.
So it needs to be clarified to that point when what I'm saying now can make more sense.
But if you think matter, you direct your matter, that's a thought.
You recognize, no matter how far it goes,
you recognize it within the domain of thought.
Next thought still shares the same nature of thought.
And you get to understand that,
when you start concerning yourself with nature of things,
as opposed to with particularity of things,
so you don't care what you think your care of thought is there.
You don't care what you see, your care of sight is there.
You start recognizing the nature of things,
but being established in a nature of thought,
nature of the thought domain,
which is basically nature of everything,
means whatever you think will be seen in its nature,
which means it will be seen in its rising,
seizing and persisting while changing for as long as it's persisting.
But it will not be confused,
it will not be assumed to stand for that,
which is outside of the domain of thought.
And even the thought outside of the domain of thought
cannot actually be outside of the domain of thought,
because it's also not a thought.
So you can't step outside of it, inconsirable.
The world has been mindful of that nature of thought.
You have to recognize it,
you have to do it at the same time to see this.
Well, no, it rises on its own.
You didn't create that thought.
So if you recognize it to the extent which has a reason,
you're not adding anything to it.
There is no assumption to it,
you're not taking anything away from it.
So that's why, by contemplating,
sort of not even the bodhisattva,
previous Buddha we've passed before,
he became the Buddha.
While he was the bodhisattva,
he recognized that, and then all he'd done
was contemplating arising,
manifesting, arising, appearance,
and disappearance,
persisting or changing in regard to five aggregates,
things in their arising,
things manifesting in their arising,
things manifesting in their seizing.
And that's it.
He'd done that long enough,
he became some Samboda,
and the same principle works for anybody
who wants to become an Arant.
Because things do arise on their own.
If they weren't,
it means you would be the master.
That's it.
That's the fact.
If you recognize feeling, I say that's just a thought.
Well, yeah, feeling is mental.
But if you say that's just a thought,
as opposed to what else?
What else is not just a thought?
Even just a thought is just a thought.
Yes, well, I mean,
it's a thought.
Well, everything is a thought, that's a thought.
So instead of that's just a thought,
no, that's a thought.
Which means, mastering your thoughts,
you'll be an Arant.
And finding out there is a suit that says it.
But you don't master your abstract scholarly proliferation thoughts.
You master the phenomenon of thoughts.
Because everything is mental in that sense.
You wouldn't be able to discern anything
if it doesn't kind of pertain to your mind.
You might come from different directions,
but that's where you know it.
You just couldn't.
So feeling is mental.
So you say whatever...
Well, mental means...
Mental means it's a phenomenon.
It's a phenomenon.
That's what my mind is.
The domain of the phenomenon is what chiptages.
And when the Buddha asks,
well, what are those dummies?
I think it's the Father like it.
What else can it be?
What are those circumstances?
It's the Father like it.
What else can it be?
So if you use thought to describe your discursive thinking proliferation,
then you shouldn't use the same word to describe this.
You could refer to this as phenomenon or a mental image.
And everything is a mental image.
Otherwise, you wouldn't be able to discern it as anything.
It would not manifest.
So the mental image of this is just thought.
It's a mental image.
Or this is just a thought.
So thoughts are mental images.
Perceptions are mental images.
Feelings are mental images.
Or thoughts are dummies.
Feelings are dummies.
Perception are dummies.
It's a phenomenon.
It's a contemplating arising and falling.
You're a contemplative arising and falling of mental images.
Yeah.
The experience as a whole is in foundations.
It has a reason.
Basically, arising is already existing or changing.
It's just increasing in its presence.
But increasing, like fading in, means up.
It's already changing while it's increasing.
So the three kinds of arising,
persisting or arising, ceasing,
and persisting while changing,
cool understood and so on,
what they're supposed to talk about.
It's not like three things in a sequence.
And it's certainly not what people,
the many others say,
arising, persisting while changing, ceasing.
That's like a linear observation of something
that fully pretends to time,
something that you can measure.
Oh, it started.
Now it's lasting.
Now it's gone.
And I'm fully out of it.
No.
Arising is already the persisting or changing.
Ceasing is already the persisting or changing.
So it's just like fading in and fading out,
while it's persisting or changing,
so it's on two completely different levels.
Arising and ceasing is on one level,
persisting or changing is another level.
So that already means you cannot not include yourself
in that form of contemplation.
So if your general experience as a whole
is arising in a certain way,
it's persisting while changing.
And if you're aware of that,
well, you're aware of you being within that.
Oh, this is arising for me,
or to me, or left of me, or right of me.
Well, it's all persisting while changing
and you're mindful of that.
And then in the same sense when something is fading away,
it's still there.
It's still a form of appearance.
That's what I mean.
You won't find it permanent at the end of the thing.
That's just another thing there.
You'll find it within the appearance,
within the persistence of that thing.
You'll find that's why it's impermanent,
because it persists on its own.
Sadly...
Can you just hold up?
So...
Yeah.
If you had a battery,
So you can practice this whole thing in regard to get on body right here right now, which
has a position it is, because when you think of my body is seated, you think that stands
for that matter which your body is, and that's already a form of conceiving. So you want
to have a thought, because you can't but not think. So you want to have a thought that
my body is seated, but then you want to leave that thought to be, to the extent that it
wants to be. In other words, you have to recognize it phenomenologically the way it has a reason.
If you do, then it will not be conceiving that because of which that thought is, which
is the four great elements. That's what I was writing in the term determination, that
because of which, because if I use the direct term, people would just think, ah, that's
it, but no, that's another thought. By saying that because of which that thought is, standing
for that because of which that thought is, means, oh, you just conceived that matter because
of which your thought is, including the idea of what that matter is. So just think of
a body posture, but don't think that to be that element, that because of which a body
posture is, so leave or rather imply that matter as inaccessible. And then when your
thoughts are, that matter is inaccessible, that is not accessing in either, that thought.
So you peripherally become more mindful. So you don't have to think about anything else
really in terms of collecting all the data and information and mapping it all out. It's
right here. So remain mindful of the four body postures correctly without them assuming
the four great elements, without your material organs standing for that because of which those
material organs are. And you will not access that matter. Yet you'll be, you'll be knowing
it, so to speak. Because you know that this body, this experience as a whole, is determined
by that because of which it's already there. Because if a body determined, it would have
been here already arisen. But then you stop assuming the existence of those determinations.
Which is another way of saying, you stop having those thoughts then standing for that because
of which your thoughts were in the first place. And that's what it means that cessation
of all this encounters. And determinations don't exist anymore. There's nothing to determine
because there's nothing to access in the first place.
But body posture, let's just, when I say body posture, the thoughts of the image of my
body, the sight of my body sitting here. What does every posture have in common? What
is the image of every posture has in common? The image of the body. Yeah. Which is why we
can just be mindful of the body is there to the extent necessary for the final knowledge.
But always the posture in itself is generally enough. But yeah, it's not the fundamental.
But the reason why it's good to think of posture because it will keep that mental element,
so to speak. It will kind of allow you to not become fully complacent in conceiving the
image of your body as there which your body is. Because posture is sort of a designation.
Yeah, it's a shape, it's a position of your body, but it's also a designation. Seated
for mental designation, which means, oh, it's always there because even knowing the body
to the extent necessary for the final knowledge, that image of the body is already a mental
designation. And that's, that's, there was no other problem. You just, what the problem
was, when that designation stood for that because of which that designation was in the first
place, stood for matter, stood for for greater, stood for the five aggregates, which is why
you take up five aggregates like the fire takes up its fuel. But they, they could, they don't
need you. They could be exist without you anyway. Or you can just be in less particular
and be mindful of your bodily posture while you're doing other things. And then just
regard that image of your bodily posture upon which you're anchored, mindful as subject
to destruction. And you can't do anything about it. Because that image is generally subject
to destruction. And that image is generally the determination for your, whatever else
particular things you're doing while you're mindful of that, means whatever you're doing
while you're mindful of that, which is subject to destruction, you won't fully appropriate.
You will remain mindful of it. Why? Because if I tell you, okay, when you go walk about
your day, do stuff, but in any, in the next minute, there might be a bullet flying through
your brain from some direction. Okay. So you will be going about your business eventually.
This will always be in the back of your mind. You're subject to death because if you were
not subject to death, he wouldn't be possible for that you would arise as a possibility.
So by, exactly, by contemplating right things, correct things as impermanent as you will
abandon everything else. Not by just applying blank, oh, it's all impermanent, it's all
changing now, it's all, that's irrelevant. But you want to see as impermanent, doesn't
mean that you see it's destruction because if you were to see destruction in your body,
well, you wouldn't see it, you'll be destroyed. You want to see it as subject to destruction.
Which means it's there, it's manifested, it's present because of that, it's subject
to be destroyed. And seeing things subject to such and such means, seeing things in their
nature. So be mindful, generally experienced as a whole, while you're aware of your body
right here, right now in this particular posture, there is, like fundamental kind of
pure thought point of your whole general experience, you would be inconceivable if this body is
not alive, it's that simple. So you're mindful of that alive body in this particular
posture, in that particular posture is something that on that level, not only on the level of
your thought, but do you think about it or not, it remains subject to be destroyed. That's
what it means, you think of it on that level. Oh, whether I think about this or not, even
when I forget, it makes no difference to that nature, it remains subjected to destruction,
it's in that domain, and nothing you can do about it. And that will be a problem of mindfulness,
the results in discernment and wisdom, not, you know, be here now and have a tree and feel
good about yourself. No, abandon everything, abandon the ship before it sinks away.
And even if things are happening too fast, busy, crowd, you can't, like follow, well, which
you're not supposed to do from the beginning, follow things particularly, but be even more
aware of what's happening particularly. You still know the body is there, and that's
the reason why all these things can happen in the first place, the body is there, which
is subject to destruction and peril, which means, well, whatever is happening right here
right now, it's kind of circumstantial, it could have not been, and certainly will not
be. And that's another reason why the whole contemporary
bustle is just so wrong, it's completely the opposite direction from what I'm just saying.
Instead of looking in the general image of your body, then if you're trying to force,
it's kind of constant, actual direct perception of body moving, touching, touching, sitting,
sitting, drinking, drinking, like absorb, absorb yourself in the moment as hard as you can.
And that's completely the other way. You don't want, well, you're not bothered about
being absorbed or not. You want to maintain the background image of a body, that determines
your absorption or lack of it, that determines it, that body which is subject to destruction.
So hence is absolutely no method or technique or subtle mechanical repetition that can
take you in a direction, that's a recognition, it's a formal understanding.
I've seen the body there, but it's certainly the body there, because it's already there,
there's a general awareness, but it's seen there, that body there is, the general awareness
order implies the body there, then you discern the body there, as that is the way the general
awareness is possible in the first place. But by doing that, I'm going to include in my
salvation. That's the thing, but doing that, you leave no room for yourself to step outside
and be excluded. So include everything, so whatever yourself, yourself tries to move,
it will be within that room. And you can't do that, but by trying to reach the most general
thought, they will kind of hold over the other thought, because there's more general to
that then. But you do that by seeing that any thought, no matter how far it goes, or how
particularly absorbed the focus is, is determined, but this position body out there, that's
subject to destruction. That's one matter and body, is the interchangible, it's the same
word, often it was interchangible, it will refer to as matter as the matter of your body,
it will refer to Rupa, because it is in Kaya, but inconceivable there's a Rupa, and often
that's the Rupa, you know. But not the actual Rupa, because the actual Rupa is inaccessible,
the four elements, inaccessible, but that's the closest proximity I was talking in relation
to, like, all these four bodies. So it was often referred to in the same word as you
would refer to the matter. So whatever, even if your thoughts of confusion, you can't make
it a lot, you can think that while you're in this body's position here is such determining
the durability to think that in the first place, and that body is subject to destruction,
and you know that. In the beginning you might have to think about it more, but after
a while it just becomes implicit in that image of that body, which means your mindfulness
gets established quicker, more properly, more skilled. So it's not about changing what
is a reason, it's just recognizing the inherent undermining structure of that. And that's
it, it's undermining, it can't access it directly, that which undermines you, because if you
would, it means you would be undermining it, it would be undermining you. So it's always
below your feet, undermining you. So you recognize that, it means, well, you're not going
to hold anything, that's being undermined. And then you're also real as well, actually,
yeah. I was not supposed to hold this at all from the start, because it was never used
to begin with, because if it were used, it wouldn't have been undermined. And I'm always
there when I'm discerning the body or being mindful of by recognizing the nature of the
body subject to destruction. You include that, yeah, because you can never include directly
your sense of self. You can't own me, I'm subject to this, no, except it kind of slides
somewhere else, your sense of self. So then what you're thinking is your sense of self,
it's not. So you can only approach it indirectly. So, oh, there is me in this general experience,
I'm sitting here, I'm breathing, I'm doing this, I'm doing that while this seated body
remains on the chair, fully subject to destruction. And then that self that you will be experienced
is not self. That's why automatically. So if you recognize correctly implements and
suffering, you don't then do, oh, so this is my not self. No, then your experience as a
whole is automatically the experience of not self. You do that long enough, you will recognize
that it's, that's what not self is. By recognizing what's really not self, well,
you'll stop holding your view of yourself. So you become sort of one who is free from
art of art, which is not recognizing what actually not self is. So for as long as you see
the not self in front of you means, ah, you excluded your sense of self, ah, which means
that's not not self. But if you do it, it's just what you said, when you general experience
as all whatever you are doing, I'm sitting here talking, whatever else, while my body,
while this material body is seated, completely subject to destruction from any direction and
I absolutely cannot even foresee it happening. I just know that it's subject to it.
Automatically, whatever I do, while I have that perception established, will be non self.
Which is exactly, see how hard it is because it's not the hard once you recognize it,
then you know what to look for. If you had the utterance of another explaining it,
sufficient enough, but you can see one over, it can become another and you'll even
see another one by accident. Because you can't recognize, like many people can do this.
Oh, you see this subject, but you can't do it long enough. You can accidentally do it once or twice or three times.
But you can't accidentally repeat it thousands of times, which is the number of times most likely
required for somebody to recognize that as a principle. So that's why the effort,
the effort, the effort, the repetition and so on. That's what practice is about.
Recognize what you're supposed to discern and then keep doing it, and keep doing it,
and keep doing it. Without somebody telling you, you're supposed to do that.
It's impossible to do it thousands of times. You just can't.
Hence you can't stumble upon it by a chance. Oh, yeah.
It was a fortunate night. It was just like that. It all happened. I'm so lucky.
It doesn't work like that. If it did, it's because you spend the whole night doing this work.
And then you know, I've done it. And for that very reason, it cannot be taken away.
It didn't come through any external circumstance, nothing. Not given, cannot be taken away.
Recognized as already there. And because it's already there,
there is nothing to do with it. That's why everybody refers to it as an ancient part.
And I could reveal it again, but it was there. Because if you weren't there,
this came from us there would not be possible.
