It was a question. If you look at the point of view, it's a niche that applies to the point of view, rather than to things like the book you'll land to you, or leave.
So you need to apply that. If you want to apply, or rather you can say a niche that can apply to both, through the point of view.
So if you want to apply a niche to the things, as it sometimes might have been done, you have to apply only to those things upon which your view depends, upon which your sense of self depends, upon which the center of your experience depends.
Basically, upon things that you took as mine, but it's not a niche that will never be understood in its nature.
If you try to approach it, think about it as some sort of law of physics, or whatever, whereby everything is impermanent, thus everything is constantly changing, thus everything will come to an end.
That might be true in theoretical sense, but in terms of freeing it from suffering, that understanding simply won't do.
Because a niche results in freedom from suffering when you see your own sense of self, your own center of experience undermined by it.
But if you look at the random things that you don't care, you have absolutely no emotional connection to whatsoever, like you simply relevant to you, you can see them as impermanent as much as you like, it won't make a big difference.
And that's the thing, as I said before, people associate impermanence with witnessing of the destruction of a thing, witnessing its ending means it's impermanent, but that can never be applied to your own point of view, because they will require you to see your own seeing as impermanent, basically in order to see that you have to see your own seeing ending, you have to see the end of your own seeing.
And that doesn't make it, well, it's impossible. Like, they will require you to step outside of the experience as a whole, the five aggregates, and then see them disappear.
And they say, okay, they are impermanent, but that's simply inconceivable, because you can't step outside of them, it's just, there is not outside of them.
You only think about outside of the five aggregates, that experience as a whole is within the five aggregates. So then it becomes clear that the impermanence, that the Buddha was teaching about, that does pertain to the five aggregates and freedom from the whole thing, cannot possibly be the impermanence of, oh, I just seen that the thing being destroyed, that's impermanent.
That's a worldly impermanence. So in that sense, as I think we discussed before, a Nietzsche, it's much more than just what's thought of, what's thought as impermanence, which means you should probably find a better translation to it, or rather, whatever translation is found, you probably need to be explained heavily, because people already have deeply limited notions of impermanence, or whatever else.
Everything's impermanent. Yeah, everything's impermanent. Yeah, it is, so, but that doesn't really, that doesn't really feel free from suffering, that kind of understanding.
Thus, if it's not free from suffering, it's not impermanence of the Buddha was teaching about, that directly results in recognition of not self.
So Nietzsche is closely related to the lack of control over things, lack of mastery, then it's related to the common notion of impermanence, of witnessing a things ending.
So yeah, by saying, by experiencing that point of view, by seeing it phenomenologically, phenomenally, you can't say that it is impermanence, or impermanence.
In the sense of all that, no, because there would just be an assumption, because you would have to step out of that point of view, I will see this.
You would have to fall away from the phenomenology, from the mindfulness of that experience, even if you call it permanent.
Even if you call it eternal, you would have to fall away from that experience, because exactly, permanent or impermanent, it's applied to it secondarily as an assumption on top of it, while in reality,
while in reality, what your experience shows you, it's basically, there is that center of that experience, and that's it.
And there's a sense of infinite, always being there.
Always being there, infinite, infinite sort of appearance, in the terms of infinite possibilities, which means infinite possibilities of being there, which means being there infinitely.
But that is then confused as lasting forever, but no matter how far the thing reaches, like there is no end in sight, that if that whole structure is swept away, means none of it can remain standing.
Thus, you don't apply the idea of an idiot, things individually, or things that you can gather through senses, you apply to the structure of your senses.
Exactly. The point of view, and... The point of view, yes, yes.
If that's abandoned and that level, through seeing that you have no control, no mastery over it, you have certainly nothing to do with it's arising, you realize, for that reason, it will come to an end.
Well, I don't even say, for that reason, it will come to an end, because again, it will induce people to think, oh, so I will witness the end, and you can't even conceive that.
Basically, you better to say, for that reason, it will never be mine.
When you see this truly impermanent, as truly a reason on its own, independent of you, you're absolutely inconceivable for you to have any say in it, is as there.
For that reason, it will never, ever be yours, even in a remote wildest of the fantasy, you can't even access it, even in that theoretical idea of ownership, impossible.
And when that realization pervades your mind through and through and through and through, you will simply stop appropriating anything.
No matter what arises on what level, what sense, how, what experience is just the idea of taking it up, it's gone.
And that's all it takes, because it's the point of views.
So when nothing can be taken as mine, no sense of self in that long, infinitely everlasting thing can ever be maintained anymore.
So what you're seeing, as in common to every experience on the more particular level, what you're seeing, the more generally the five aggregates, or one among them, just different aspects of your experience.
But yeah, as a structure, there always have to be there, but then as a structure, there will not be discerned, even as a structure, if those particular things are not a reason, beforehand, not given.
So it feeds itself, mutually determined, depending on where you look at.
And that center, sense of self, it's kind of in the center, it sort of feels like it's always there, it's always seeing these things, witnessing these things or whatever else.
You don't have to deny that, you don't have to try to remove that, in a sense of this is wrong, no it's there, as such.
All you have to do is see that also as something that has a reason on its own, in the result of other things that have already a reason on their own.
That's even that sense of self, you can't own. And you certainly, because if you would, again in theory, if you would truly be the master of that sense of self, if you tell it to stop arising, it should stop arising.
If you tell it to either they seek you, otherwise like that.
So impermanence is found right in the heart of non-mastery things, like you are not in control of their arising, you are not controlling.
Like you can be in control of, I think we spoke about a few days ago, to various different options that present you, for example, may come down to choosing.
Oh, you can choose this or this or that or that, but what you cannot choose or not choose is the whole structure of choice that you are basically well imprisoned by.
Within you have no choice, either I'm not going to choose, you just chose.
I refrain from any form of choice or action, well, that's a form of choice. So you will keep revolving on it, you can't step outside of it through that choice.
The only way you can step outside through that kind of fully enclosed picture is if you start discerning it from inside as something that actually, well, cannot be used,
thus, no matter what choices you make, within that, can't pertain to you either.
No, the result of those can eventually pertain to you either, because you abandoned the whole thing, but that is only possible once the moral behavior, the restraint, and see life have been developed and purified beforehand.
Because if you just take it abstractly, you can say, okay, so it doesn't matter what I do, it doesn't apply to me. No, it does.
For as long as your bomb bite, it applies to you. Like there is no, the beginning, there is no discernible beginning of when these things started applying to you.
Yet, it is gratuitous setup. That's why a BJ is a gratuitous parasite, as they really called it. So it shouldn't be there, but the fact that it's there means it's there.
Once you undo it, the only reason you're able to undo it is because it was never meant to be there.
Not knowing that it was never meant to be there, you placed it there, and you maintained it there.
When you discern that it actually cannot be there, it's not there.
So through purification of the behavior, of the body, the speech and the mind, then eventually you recognize that no matter what options of your choice are given to you, the nature of the choice is not in your control.
That's why you can only choose is good, bad or neutral.
So at any focus choosing good, or wholesome rather, not necessarily good, good, what's accepted, comedy, society is good, but what is awesome, what is non-grade, non-version, non-delusion, that's what you choose.
There are three choices.
Well, yeah, fundamentally, yeah, there are only three directions. Then within those directions you can have more directions and so on. And that's what confuses people in thinking their own things.
But the fact is that you were thrown within that center, within that inevitability of choice means you don't really own that either.
So what particular choice you make on the result of that inevitability of that choice, it doesn't really matter.
Fundamentally, it matters practically, it matters on a particular level whether it's wholesome or unwholesome, whether it's going to contribute to the maintenance of that delusional view or undermining of the delusional view.
So it matters, in that sense, but fundamentally, from the point of view of the final rate, it doesn't really matter because the nature of the choice is there.
That's why somebody who doesn't understand that nature of choice in a band, and he goes beyond good and bad, beyond wholesome and unwholesome.
And you don't have to go far to look for it. Just take up any experience, take the experience right here right now.
There is a sense of, call itself, there is a sense of self, there is a sense of the death which is in common, death which is in common to all of the different experiences you can get through different senses.
That's the center of your experience, the knee or the point of view, or if you're more spiritually inclined, you can call it the observer, as is the pure awareness, the knower, whatever else.
Call it whatever you like. If you take it to be yours, that's a problem. If you don't take it to be yours, that's a solution.
So that thing can still remain, because it's inevitable. When there is a point of view, it has to be centered somewhere.
It's just that you end up assuming the nature that center has permanent, thus you take it up to be yours.
But there is no center, if there are other things defining the center. You can't even conceive, or this is in the center of what?
If there is nothing defining it, the center will not be decent, at all. It just will not emerge.
So no matter how, and that center can always look the same. Sure, it's always the center of different things, but it's the fact that there are different things, that's what defines the center.
So even your sense of self then is defined by all the other particular things. And certainly, if that sense of self is taken to be mine, to be mine, own self, that's defined by all other particular things that you own, that you took to be mine.
Implicitly, little bit here, little bit there, they all contribute to them, this center of self, that's in common to all of them, feels like, really mine, really personal, really dear to me.
So that's what needs to be removed out of it, not the actual sense of the center of the experience, the ownership of it.
That's the problem there. You remove that ownership, and then what you have left it when you recall the individuality.
The center of it, right?
The center of that, those five aggregates, the most common center, the most prevailing characteristic of a center of those five aggregates.
And that's different to different people. So different individuals. Even if it's the same, let's say, if it's two individuals the same, the fact is they are two thus, they're different, there's one, there's two.
Even if they're completely mirrored, it's still two thus, it's two different things, two different individuals.
In that sense, you can't have like two, two five aggregates to be identical, because if there will be identical, there will be indistinguishable.
Yeah, we can't imagine.
Yeah, a place where we're by things like experience, a place.
Well, see, no, not quite. They're not experiencing it.
But these periods of things generates the sense of the center.
Here, here.
Well, again, depends on how they find here. If they find here as opposite of Yonder, then it's not here, because you haven't found it here.
It's including, it has to include both, so it would be there.
So that center, it's in regard to particular experiences.
But they're not in the center, nowhere is the center in them.
It's just when they're senses, there's a sense of a center in regards to senses, which is exactly how the mind and the senses are kind of arranged.
So to speak, they meet in the mind. They all center in it. They all gather there.
So you can see that even the arrangement of the six senses, the five senses and the mind is the sixth.
Already implies, already reflects that structure of these particular things generating meeting up in the center.
Now the mind would simply not be discerned if there are no five senses.
There will be nothing defining it.
If there is no, well, it's not perfect analogy, but it can give you the idea. If there are no bricks consisting making this little house, you wouldn't have a house.
And you certainly will not have a center in that house. Oh, this is the center of the house, because you remove all the definition of it.
So in that sense, the mind is defined through these five senses, but then at the same time these five senses, well, they would simply not be operable in any way if there is no mind, if there is no the recognition in the mind.
So even that structure already implies the idea of ownership. So you can see how it's not hard to end up assuming the sense of self, the owner, the soul, the me, I am.
Because things are arranged in that way, and then you just have to kind of put that last little touch to it and make a mind.
So that's why I have to go against that grain, against that seeming kind of arrangement of the self in the center, which is basically a deception.
And you go against it, nobody denying this center of experience. You can take, I am, I am me, I am myself. You can take that as a valid phenomenon.
You are, you are yourself. Now, don't take that to be yours. That whole experience of me, I am, you disown that.
So when you disown that personal center, the personality aspects, because there's no ownership in regard to it, and you just have the individual left experience, experience, experience of these very five objects, experience of this point of view, experience of these preferences.
So that's why I am, it's an indistinguishable external position, I can't tell them apart, why wouldn't it? You can be individual without being a person, but you can't be a person without already including individuality in it.
So I'm doing the personal, basically if you appropriate your individuality, you become a person. And the fact that you are already a person is that appropriation is already there, beginningless.
But as you can see, it is good serious. So remove the ownership of your, of your person, of your sense of personality.
However very good generally it might be, you remove the ownership of it, but you have left this individual. And you remove the ownership of it by seeing that you can't really control it, it doesn't belong to you.
That it could cease at any given moment, enough to make you let go of it, not overdo it and deny its existence, but certainly stop holding it as yours, as something you are in charge of.
So impermanence is, if you want to translate the Nietzsche's impermanence, it's basically closer, more closely related to the things might cease, than actually seeing them cease.
So the fact that you, your own sense of self, might cease, that's enough to disson the nature of impermanence but any to it.
And then you can see that might, and actually you need thing to be present in order to see that it's possible for it to come to an end.
And if you recognize the possibility, that's it, you recognize the nature of impermanence.
But even if it was permanent, you can't imagine how that is. You can't imagine a thing to exist without a possibility to not be. Why? Because it is.
Basically being becomes the reason for its impermanence, arising. If because it has a reason, that's why the possibility of itsization is inherently there in that nature of that arising.
So you don't have to see them cease at all. You just have to recognize them arising. And if you descend that nature, you will see that it is the inherent implicit possibility of them to not be simply because they are right now.
And that possibility, that's enough. In the same sense of that possibility to suffer in the future, it's suffering in itself right now, that possibility.
Like you might feel great today, tomorrow, whatever. You might feel great right now. If you think the next week, there might be something that will cause you to suffer. And that's already form of worry. And worry is unpleasant right here right now.
So it pertains to the same thing. Seeing that, okay, I am here. I'm alive right here right now. So the next week, I might not be. That's it. That's all it takes.
That's all. Where? How long has this been going on for? How long will it go on for?
That's exactly that down. Yeah, that little down. Well, that little down. See, if you look at it, yeah, if you look even closer, you can see how long has this been, doesn't matter.
Means for as long as it has been going on for, there was always possibility for it to not be. And for that reason, for as long as it was going on for, it was impermanent.
And because it was impermanent in that sense, you have no control over it. That's why it was suffering.
So in the same sense, as if you have no control over it. Possibilities. I can control this or that. But I can control all possible possibilities that might before this experience.
You're just inconceivable because control is secondarily to this possibility. It's defined by the possibilities, your choice, which is a synonym for people who produce a synonym with control.
It's defined by things that are possible or not possible. You can't choose that, which is not possible. Yet those possibilities aren't very uncertain.
So they undermine not just your present experience, but even your possible choice in regard to those possibilities. It's determined by the possibilities.
So usually people could discern possibilities based on the present experience. That's the way it has to be.
And the more you discern, it becomes apparent that structurally, possibilities precede the experience as it has a reason. They're more primordial.
Then if they're simultaneously present, it doesn't mean that possibilities come first and then this thing follow later.
Now they simultaneously arise, but possibilities are more general in the nature, which means they're deeper, so to speak, in terms of the structure. They're more fundamental.
So the nature of a possible.
And that's really permanent. That's what nature suffering is.
And if it's seen as such, means right here, right now, this center, this me, this self, will not be mine.
Will not feel mine.
So is it possible for you sitting right here right now? Is it possible for you to die in the next two minutes? Well, in the next in-breath.
Is it possible?
Well, no, you do know if it's possible or not. But you don't know. That's what I'm saying. Well, there's not even a doubt. There's just been kind of obstinately blind.
Because if you look at it closely, you don't know that you might die, but see, the fact is that you don't know that you might die means you might die.
And the fact that you might die, the fact that there is 50-50, say, or the fact that it's like one percentage, you might die. Still, there is one chance in 100 that you might be dead.
That's enough to see this very center of yourself right here, right now, as you speak, as you doubt, as you think about death, as not being yours.
Not being able to be yours. Because if it were truly yours, there would be simply no possibility of death pertaining to it.
So you can doubt. If you want to doubt whether you can die next moment or not, it's better to turn it differently and then doubt whether you're going to be alive the next moment or not.
Because it's the same thing. It's obvious you can see by doubting whether mortal or not, you give priority to a sense of self.
But if you doubt whether I'm mortal or not, you give priority to death. You give priority to a non-sense of self. It's the same thing.
And I said it in the same way for that reason. Actually, you can doubt whether you're going to die or you can doubt if you're going to be alive.
So is it possible for you to be alive next moment? Maybe not me.
Exactly. So maybe not. That's it. That's what importance is.
But I might not be alive, rather than I might die. Well, if you acknowledge to it properly, then you can ask either way.
But the reason why I said differently is because, yeah, you said like many people would say, well, I don't know.
I'm here now and you know, maybe that experience of death has still been here. Maybe that's it. The fact that it's maybe for you right here right now means maybe not.
And if it means maybe not means you're not in control of it. And if you're not in control of it, you can't be using the future as a possibility and certainly not yours right here right now.
And then you can look well. You were certainly not mine, even in the past. That's where the audience's knowledge pertains to, you know, the present knowledge pertains and pervades his past and the future.
He doesn't even think, even before he was in the other hand, when he remembers his protrusion at the time, he doesn't think I was back then either. Because that sense of abandoning ownership of your sense of self, he just prevents the whole structure present, past his present and future is present and present is present.
So you can say this sense of self, this center of my experience just feels so real, so permanent, he's just eternal, been around all the time.
And they're all not developed in terms of how it feels. It's not up for debate, but what it is, what is up for debate is if it's going to stay like that or not. And even if you assume well, since all I can remember, it was this sense of self, thus this sense of self will continue.
That will be an assumption, always. Because as I said, well, maybe you won't. And then maybe is enough for you to discern, if you look closely enough, the impermanence of it, just because there is the tiny little thread of maybe in it.
And if you start looking at it closer, it will longer and longer. Well, it would be less or less of a thread to become more or more like a proper foundation of the experience, the full-on structure of that maybe.
And if it was if everything sits upon maybe, I can't own it. I can own only that which was given beforehand. Or rather, I can entertain the idea of ownership in regard to that which was given beforehand, which means even that entertained idea of ownership is the result of that which was given beforehand, which was already affected by that maybe.
That's my whole ownership is not really mine because it could have been otherwise. And that's the pilot-handed scholars' kind of argue over that. It will not be it won't be mine.
Not just so much.
Not just so much on the other side.
So, it's not mine right here right now because it was affected by that maybe.
So whatever it's in the future, it will certainly not be mine.
Even if it's mine, so to speak.
Even if it has a reason for me given, and I could ever say it's my choice, it will not be for me.
Because it was affected by that inherent possibility of maybe not.
So if everything that arises is maybe, maybe for you, maybe not.
Means that which has a reason as for you, it's not for you either.
Because it could have been not.
And there's a similar one when the Buddha, the other one,
The more things that you haven't seen.
He said that more things that you haven't seen.
Other more things that you haven't heard than the ones that you heard.
Of course, there are more things that haven't a reason for my senses than the things that have a reason.
And the Buddha said, for that very reason, you abandon everything that has a reason.
a reason in the past, everything arises now and everything that will arise in the future
while because those things that have an arisen will always remain more numerous, which means
if you go back to what I just said about this possibility of maybe not, maybe yes, maybe
it will persist, maybe it will arise in the same way, maybe it won't.
Means whatever does arise, there will always be possibility of it not being, those possibilities
will be always more numerous.
So then the possibility of maybe not is actually much faster than everything that has arisen
and then you start looking at your whole experience, like say you, not just this life, but you
can look all of the lives you've been around, you can look at the whole thing is completely
circumstantial.
A reason, but it could have not and that could have not was much faster, much greater than
that which did manifest at some point in time.
And then you can think about the future as well, whatever does arise, if you do continue
living for a while, whatever does arise, it will arise on the ground of that much faster
non-erizing.
That's whatever it's given no matter how great, how long it will, how painful, how frightening
it could have not been and that could have not been and it wouldn't have been for me,
it's much greater.
So it could have not been and that which did come to be, it certainly not for me because
it came on the basis of all the things that haven't even manifested.
Thus that which manifests, it's completely circumstantial determined by all of it that
didn't manifest.
And so it certainly cannot be mine or for me or special in that sense, because every
sense of ownership is special, it's mine.
I, like even if it takes a sense of self, means yeah, that's why I can see the ego revolve
around the appropriation of your own sense of self, you feel special.
But if you look at the whole thing, including a sense of completely circumstantial random,
uncertainty, uncertainty, uncertainty, uncertainty, maybe, yes.
But again, I'm sure I didn't share, well, I'm not sure because I never met you, but based
on other things that I did read of his transcripts, I'm pretty positive that he meant it in
a right way when he said, mine everything, I'm sure, I'm sure.
Obviously people now just say that as a sort of mantra, but as you can see, you need to
do a bit of drilling and digging in order for this maybe or I'm sure or uncertain to start
to apply correctly.
I do, as you just be denying everything, oh, whatever, what time you come in, I'm sure,
I'm sure.
What's that?
Yeah.
It's like something to eat today.
No.
I'm certain about it.
Yeah, I'm a certain about it.
Well, are you uncertain about your uncertainty?
Yeah.
Because obviously you think it is.
Yeah.
Because you can be taking your sense of uncertainty as me is mine, see.
I'm not attached to anything and you're attached to the view, I'm not attached to anything.
Yeah.
It makes it be more than that, but yeah, yeah, it comes down to that.
The fact that it's, it was always affected by me, it means whatever has a reason.
It was more likely to not be.
And because there's always a greater likelihood of things not being, you can, you can, you
can then realize, well, there's nothing I can own.
There's nothing that will entertain, nothing that will escape this uncertainty.
What if it's with me for hundreds of years, well, like there was, like there were last
four years, and years, and yeah, sure, they forget that they were born, because they've
been around for so long, they're memory-religious, and they do think they're eternal for
that reason.
Well, it's not accidental that people then entertain the kind of notions of eternity when
it comes to the sense of self and the soul, because yeah, it's always, it's always like
all these particular things might be arising or whatever, and I can see them being destroyed,
but they sense the self remains there.
But there's always possibility for it to not remain there, and you don't look at that
possibility, because if people start looking at the possibility that they might die, they
start freaking out.
Because yeah, going back to what's the possibility that I might die, or death might happen to me.
Yeah, that again, you might be, you might be better to ask, am I still going to be alive?
Yeah, because I'll say death will happen to you.
It's a center, it shifts the center of the question, that will happen to me, then it becomes
death becomes another external experience that you witness thus you remain permanent,
thus you remain unaffected by that death, which is exactly what people think, they say
everybody dies, I will die.
And then I experience something, and then maybe this kind of weirdness.
So even death will be an experience of me with, or experience that I'm witnessing, that
might sense the self is witnessing, that's my sense of self, we remain eternal.
But if you think, well, will my sense of self remain eternal?
Oh, well, maybe.
And the fact that it's maybe the fact that you can't give 100% certain answer, means that's
a problem.
And you will never be able to give 100% certain answer of why, because you can doubt it
to begin with.
You can place it in the question by asking, am I?
Because if you are 100% certain, if you are truly the owner, even the question of questioning
that ownership will be inconceivable, because you will own the future in the same sense you're
owning right here, right now, through the present.
So even if you come to the answer, yes, I will live forever.
The fact that you have asked that question beforehand, means that question of, what
other that possibility of maybe preceding is there, which means you can, whatever you come
up with as an answer, it's going to be an assumption, because it was accessible to
doubt.
And by doubting it means you can't really own it, there is no certainty in regard to it.
So by doubting whether you're going to be alive, you recognize that, okay, I'm not in charge
of that.
And even if you convince yourself that you will always be, that your sense of self is eternal,
you realize that can always be placed in question.
Even if you refrain from doing it, the fact that there is a possibility of it being
questioned, means it's subject to that maybe.
And if it's subject to that maybe, then it's not certain.
And that's what it means, is, is it, any, anything, take any, any, non certainty, any
uncertainty, sorry, take any uncertainty, take any uncertainty in regard to anything, of
that nature, it will always be suffering.
Duke or other, let's not call it suffering, because suffering would be an over-translation
in the same sense as in permanence, would be an over-translation.
So let's call it unease.
Any uncertainty is also uneasy.
And if something is uncertain and uneasy, it's calling it like a form of concern, that
cannot possibly be something you are in control of, because control is completely opposite.
Control is, is, control is ownership, control is mastery, control is control.
And certainty, of course, yeah, control, yeah, because if I'm, if I'm in control, this
is certain.
But say you're driving a car and say, well, it's uncertain that this car will always
go where you, where you sort of steer the wheel, means oh, so I'm not really in control
of it.
Even if 99% of the time you are controlling the car, that one percent of it, no listening
to you means your control was undermined by that relativity.
All the time.
At any given time of your control, it was always undermined by possibility of not being
your control.
Thus, it was never your control in that personal eternal sense.
So well, there it is, the formula.
It might not be, and it might not be for me, it will not be, and it will not be for me.
So as I said, it might not be, and there will not be for me, means a thing is affected
by that uncertainty, by that maybe.
So whatever has a reason right here, right now, it could have not a reason.
It was uncertain, okay, it manifests in a certain way, and that's certain, but that whole
certainty is undermined by this more general uncertainty that it could have, like it
could have easily not been.
And you can look at your experience, like whatever you pass, whatever happened to you,
it could have not happened.
And you know, the bad things, everybody wishes that they wouldn't have not, they wouldn't
have happened, and the good things, obviously, you never question.
But if you look at the whole thing, impersonally, so to speak, you would recognize that, yeah,
it, these things that have a reason, they could have equally not manifested itself.
So you had no say in the arising thus, so the formula that carries on thus, it will not
be, and it will not be for me.
So you recognize that then in the future, whatever arises, it could be on a basis of, it
could have not a reason, and because of that.
So even if it arises in the future, it might arise, sure, but one thing for sure, it will
never arise for you as yours, as mine, because it was always affected by that uncertainty.
So things right here, right now, are affected by that uncertainty.
And then things in the future that arise, if I lived that long, let's say, they might
arise, but one thing for sure is they will not arise as mine, because if they were mine
to begin with, they would never be uncertain, but the fact that you find a certainty first
means whatever arises in the future, whatever experience you go through, it's circumstantial,
and as such, it can never be yours.
So you can go through all sorts of experiences, you can live for 200 years, but one thing
you will be certain of is that none of it will be arising for you, I, for your sense
of self, I, for your independent sense of self that exists completely in charge of all
these things that are manifesting for you, I, they will not be arising for this center,
I, this center will not be independent of those things that arise.
What's the part of it?
The part of the formula is no chance, no chance is here, not by sati, not by sati.
So the literal translation, it might not be, and there, there might not be for me, which
is kind of debatable, they can't agree how to translate that.
So it might not be, it might not be for me, it will not be, and it will not be for me.
There's an uncertainty there, so the things are uncertain, right here, right now, you know
things you're certain of, you can doubt that certainty is existing, which means it's
uncertain.
But it can be certain about that.
Well you can be certain that it will always remain uncertain, which means you can be
certain about the impermanence, which means you can be certain about suffering, which
means you can be certain about not taking anything to be in your control.
Thus Nibbana is, was it a surety, was it a translation of what you're saying?
Like a sure, you're a suret of, I think I've seen that surety, I don't know maybe I'm
pronouncing it wrongly, but surety or surety of confidence, basically you are certain,
which is why it's a liberation, it's not actually, it's unshakable.
That form of certainty, certainty that makes you take everything is uncertain as a result
of that, makes you not take anything as yours.
So the thing is that whatever has a reason, it could have, not a reason, right here right
now, which means whatever does arise in the future, it will be equally affected by that
circumstantial nature, which means whatever arises in the future, then might happen, one
thing for sure, it cannot be learned, why?
Because you can doubt it right here right now, pretty much exactly what I said before,
I just didn't pronounce the form, look at that.
For one, with such view, with this view, that it might not be, and no, another thing
is that you can see that this entire form will pertains to the nature of possibility.
It refers to it might not be, it might not be for me, or rather it might not be there,
it might not be for me, it cannot be and they will not be for me.
So it tends to the possibility right here right now, and then the future possibility of
possibilities are even more sort of removed from that sense of ownership, the fact that
they are under the big question mark, might, maybe.
So whatever is present right here right now, you can look at it and say, well, yeah, it
is present, it is defined, it is a reason, but it was all on the ground of that maybe,
because you realize, well, it could have, it could have not been easily, equally.
In anything, like no matter what it is, you can, because why?
Because you are not in control of your own sense basis.
So no matter what you've seen, Earth tastes tangent, the smell, thought of, you realize,
it could have not been why, because the things that, the taste that's seen, like your eye,
things that's melt, your nose, things that's thought, your mind, will always uncertain.
In a sense, they will not necessarily persist, and they don't persist, anything that you
access through them is inconceivable.
So obviously, you can't, as you can see, you can't be destroying your own eye to see
the nature of impermanence, that doesn't make sense, because then you won't be able
to see that.
But if you see that there is a, in the heart of it, there is a possibility that it might
not be, then you realize, oh, yeah, that's why I can't own it.
Thus, it might not be, automatically means, if it is, it will not be for me, down there.
And what I said, for one, we touch view, it is to be expected that there will be no
attraction towards being for him, and there will be no repulsion towards the station of
being in him.
So if you put his heart into this, his mind into this understanding, a monk could easily
cut the lower fetters, so if you ponder on this long enough, and drill in the standing
of it, on and on and on, the Buddha said that he wouldn't be, before long, that monk
could be free from the fire-load of fetters, means on the going of it.
And you can see that, if you, if you not just disown everything like here right now, through
the discernment of being it uncertain, being impermanent, you also, anything future,
no matter how remote, how unmindful of it, you might be.
You disown it as well, through recognition that you can't own it, because it's always
coming on the background of, well, maybe not.
And as I said, I didn't think of this, but it's pretty much the same thing when I said
that if people to really doubt their own life, in a sense, if they were really putting
question, whether they're going to exist the next moment or not, they'll concern a
worry and care for an untrained mind with a rise, because you can, you can be applying it
in that external manner of saying, oh, well, everybody dies, I would die, but you don't
really, you don't really question that point of view, but if you look at the point of
view, your sense of self, your center of experience, their soul, whatever you want to call
it, no matter how permanent, how dare, how stable it feels, if you just look at it honestly
and say, will it, will this thing be there, next moment, maybe not, and then you know
that if it is there, it will not be for you, because you doubt it, but if somebody, if
an untrained mind can also look in the direction of death, that's what death is, will this center
of experience be there, next moment, it might not, that's what dying is, and the Buddha
said when the uninstructed commoner becomes, he becomes terrified when there is no ground
for fear, because it should be liberating, but for him, it's frightening, but it's the
same thing they're thinking about, but somebody who is not an uninstructed commoner, if he starts
thinking, thinking about this, maybe not, with us, if it is, it will certainly not be for
me, because if it were for me, I couldn't have not doubted it in the beginning, to begin
with, I couldn't have put it in question at all, and that's, that's liberating, you make
sure, you let go, you stop assuming, you stop appropriating things, for an untrained mind,
if he was, if he were to think, it might not be, and they might not be for me, to not
be, and they will not be for me, he experienced terror and fear, because, well, his lack of instruction
means that he still remains fully centered in his sense of self, that he himself now
undermined, thoroughly, through putting it in question, oh, it might not be, and that's
just what people freak out, like, now there's people freak out, back in the widest time,
people freak out, they follow the ground with their breasts, put their hair, you know, like
this sort, when you really like, and that's what nature of that is, not seeing other people
die, not seeing the ending of other people, putting in question your own, or in non-ending,
imagining your body dying, or imagining your body dying, that's nothing to do with death,
no, if your own mind that does that imagining, like, you realize that that has a reason
on the ground of, maybe, could have not a reason, thus, when it does the right in the future,
it might not arise in the future, if it does arise in the future, it will not arise
as mine, thus, I will not be, and that's, that's, that's, like, terrifying, for those who
still hold that sense of, I am, that sense of soul, that sense of the center of experience
they will die, they, they, they lose it, and that was said, but instructing nobody's
eyeball, he does not become terrified, when he, when he, it's not terrifying for him
to think, it might not be, and there might not be for me, it will not be, and there
will not be for me, and it's just a confirmation of what he already instructed himself in,
thank you for suffering.
