These questions seem to revolve around a suitor that maybe I should read out and it's the
a big pecuni, some uter from the name of Padira and talk about the chariot. So go for it, I don't know where he is now.
Mara, the evil one, says, by whom is this creature formed? Who is the creature's maker? Who is the risen creature?
Who is the creature that ceases? And Padira the nun says, why do you refer to the creature? Mara, are you involved in wrong view?
This is a pile of pure determinations. There is here no creature to be found, just as for an assemblage of parts there is the term chariot.
So when there are the aggregates, convention says the creature. It is merely suffering that comes into being, suffering that stands and disappears.
Nothing apart from suffering comes into being, nothing other than suffering ceases.
That's it? Yeah, that's quite good. See, there's the whole point there, the designation of a chariot.
As she says, can I have that please? She never, she does not deny the name, the term, given to the assemblage of parts.
There is a assemblage of parts, there is a name chariot. It's a functional assemblage of parts, it's called chariot.
All of it is real. The assemblage of parts, yeah, you can break the chariot into parts, or rather you can descend the parts within the chariot, in the same sense you can descend more particular things within the general things.
Ultimately the most general being the five aggregates, the nature of form, feeling, deception, determinations, consciousness. Within that general phenomenon of those aggregates, you can have more particular manifestations of it.
And the experience as a whole evolve, you can call a person, you can call whatever.
But there's a difference between if you're just designating it, or if that designation stands for your self view, for your wrong view of really assuming the priority of that designation over those parts.
So the problem is that the questions of the king, King Melinda, I think it evolved around similar, but it's somewhat subtle, but not that subtle.
But again, if people don't really carefully, they won't see it. Well, by, he dismisses, he says that by destroying parts, you destroy the name that you've given to the parts.
Not even that, not even you destroy, but more like you deny the reality of it. Because he said, well, see there is a chariot.
But if you take a chariot and break it up, break these parts up, then there is no chariot anymore.
No, there is. There's still parts of chariot. It's just, it's not functional anymore, so you can call it somewhere else, something else.
So you don't, like, he might have replaced the particular designation of a chariot, but he doesn't see that he did not undo the nature of designation standing for your wrong view.
In other words, he might have fixed, not even fixed, he might have replaced or affected a particular designation, but not affected the nature of designation.
Why? Because you can destroy the chariot into parts, or even destroy the parts, into completely non-functional parts.
Still, there is a designation in regard to that, you would call it the pile of rubbish.
And it's equally real, as the chariot was a designation for functional assemblage of those parts, not just when they were thrown around on a pile.
So you can't, like, even conceive not having a designation, like name and matter, number, or just, oh, that's your experience.
Not just, oh, undo Nama, and have the pure full group of whatever else. They don't even think in those terms, but they do imply that affecting designation, destroying it, denying its reality, or whatever else, somehow frees you from the view attached to it.
But it doesn't, because you can't actually even conceive the absence of designation, because an absence of designation is another designation.
Oh, there is no designation here. You just designated it with that.
So, sister Vajira here, she does not, be cognizant yet. Yeah.
She does not, yeah, Vajira, the nun. She does not deny. She doesn't say this chariot is not real.
She says, this chariot, this designation exists on account of the five aggregates existing.
But she has fully understood that the five aggregates have a reason on their own.
You cannot even conceive being a master of them, or owning them, they manifest for that reason, they will cease.
Thus, any designation that arises in regard to that shares the same nature, cannot even be owned, appropriated access, nothing.
It just designates this while this is. But this is not anymore, that designation is it.
But there is no question of whether it's real or not, and what's behind it, and what comes first, not anything like that.
So, she has no need to destroy the five aggregates to prove to herself that designation is mere hollow, designation of whatever else.
No, she knows that the five aggregates have a, you can't even destroy the five aggregates. That's incomprehensible.
You can't change the order of the parts, as in a bit of points out in his critique of the questions of King Melinda.
Because you can undo chariot, but you can't do your own experience and like throw it on a pile and prove yourself that your designation because of that are not real.
It's a bit like a fantasy that doesn't even stand like it remotely for the way things actually are, because you can't even conceive the step outside of your experience and change it
to see that it can be changed. But that happens when people want to observe, they want to perceive the change as a proof of impermanence or whatever else.
But as I said before, that's not what impermanence is. Impermanence is in the fact that a thing, an aggregate, a phenomenon of any kind, has a reason on its own.
You have no say in its manifestation. For that very reason, it's impermanent, because it has a reason, that's why it has to cease.
No other reason. Just because you've manifested and you have no access to the point of origin of that benefit.
You can't even conceive how things are, they just manifest basically. All you can discern is arising. For that reason, that thing will have to cease.
But can't you discern arising, but you can also know that it is dependent, that it is a reason, because of some, well, dependent on something else.
Such a?
It can't arise. You can't just have designation and a river.
Oh yeah, no, no. I'm just talking about the experience as a whole. I'm not talking about designation itself here, when I was referring to anything that arises.
Because anything that arises can be taken as a thing itself. Thus the sort of analysis that whatever has the nature of arising, has the nature of ceasing.
Be it a designation, be it a perception, be it a days, be it that, shares the nature of arising.
Because it partakes in that nature. For that reason, because it manifests, that's why it's impermanent.
Not because you see it's ending, you see it's cessation. You see it's disappearance of destruction. No.
You know that it's there, because it has a reason. If it has a reason, it could have not ceased in the future. It could have not be liable to a possibility to cease in the future.
Why? Because it's never manifested. Because it was manifested, that's why it's going to go.
Even if you never see it go, you know, it's manifested, thus it's impermanent.
Because when I say it's manifested, thus it's impermanent, because it is dependent on something.
What? Well, like the particles, I feel, feeling can't just be by itself.
No, they will come fine, but still what's the dependence? I don't see the connection there. Unless, go?
Yes, I mean, that is dependent on the other four.
Yeah, well, but the other fours are equally dependent on each other.
So, which means that you basically, from an arisen thing, as arisen, you went into comparison with other arisen things.
And I have treated them as a group, failing to see that that entire group is just one arisen thing.
Also, on a more general level, and that is impermanent.
For no other reason, then the reason of, because it has arisen.
Okay, you can get five aggregates, you can say they are well, they depend on each other well, and what, or five of them depend on them.
Or nothing.
Because any dependence you look of that kind is a linear dependence that you can perceive.
They don't need to depend on anything.
Just the fact that they have manifested, and their sense of self comes secondary to that, and always will be.
You can't access. You can't be the reason for the manifestation.
You can't arm here, and then create them out there.
Why? Because even the thought of arm here is already preceded by the appearance of the five aggregates.
So, they are always ahead of you, or below you, or around you, and closed within them.
They will be the most accurate to put it.
So, sure, yeah, there is no feeling without perception and intention. There is an intention without feeling and perception.
So, depending on what approach you take, the point is, well, all of them, as the experience is at all, as general as you can push it,
share the same nature of being manifested.
And that's the sole reason for their impermanence.
So, you can't explain that using linear explanation, because if you could, means that our view could be explained,
could be deduced by observing things, but you can't.
That's why it's so subtle to get it. It's still a view.
But it comes only personally as a direct insight, based on obvious external instructions, knowing what to look for.
And that's why it's always summed up in that general, very general description of whatever has a nature arising, has a nature of ceasing,
which is basically the other way, putting it in permanent.
Whatever has a nature arising, it's in permanent.
And that's the whole point.
Your five aggregates don't cease, but as long as you look. So, if you need them to actually observe their cessation in order to understand impermanence,
that's a constriction in terms, means, because you'll be dead when they cease.
So, how can you observe impermanence then? You can't.
So, impermanence is not in the scientific observation of things disintegrating in impermanence,
is in the fact that you have no control, no input, in that very subtle, very general notion of things arising, manifesting.
And the experience of destruction of things, it's another arising.
So, arising is manifesting, ceasing is manifesting, changing whilst checking, the sanding is also manifesting.
And because things are manifesting, they're impermanent, not because they have a duration or a shelf life.
There's always some, maybe I can't remember far back in I thought, it's things are always changing, it's always things.
Just taking on different forms, never ending, just taking on another form, evolving, becoming.
It's an iron, I can't remember our previous life or previous forms.
But it's a duration or something. But then you fail to see, right there and then,
that you have a thought that connects all of those forms.
And you're not seeing that thought as impermanent, which is where your self is, which is why there are wrong views,
which is why people can't think that, and which is why people do think,
ah, like the matter, the four great elements of fire, depending on what division you take, and although I list those wrong views in the suitors,
there's nothing really destroying, nothing really changes, they're always there, they just change its shape or whatever else,
but it's always the same things always has been, always will be.
So whether you chop someone's head off or whatever, it's just elements going through elements, nothing exists,
not here, failing to see that that is a very gratuitous thought of you that you adopted,
and you have no proof for it, because if you can't remember what was in your previous life,
how can you remember that it was there if you can't remember that it wasn't?
You can't, which means you decide because it's more pleasing to you for whatever reason.
You decide that there was, you decide that there will be.
But if you were to remove all of the bad faith, which means it takes away all the wrong views,
the only thing that you can refer to as a fact, as a law, as something that is undeniable,
is something that you did not create, that you did not concoct in your thoughts or assumptions,
would be whatever has a reason, it's incriminate, that's it, only that.
So then the old Dhamma is built just on that, or within that.
And yeah, you can build a good thought.
When you look back to the memories of your past, you connect that.
Exactly, you made that connection right here, right now, for which you have no proof,
any more than the fact that you don't have proof whether it was really always changing or not,
or impermanent or not.
Which means you decide, you make an assumption that it was so.
Because there are, I was like, you have a photo of yourself as a child and you, as a teenager,
and you make the connection.
You look at the photo and say, that's who I was.
But it's who I am more.
Well, there is a connection in a sense that there is a connection between particular and general.
It is still the enduring body that is changing while remaining the same.
It's a one offshoot from your mother that is now growing old and aging and so on,
while overall remaining the same body, the same produce.
But that's just, that's just things existing on different levels of generality.
Other changes, they are allowed to because on a more general level, a finger remains the same.
So arising, ceasing, and changing while standing.
So it's not all in there in front of you, which means if you approach your designation in that sense,
you won't see it as a designation.
It will always be in regard to that.
But none of that is a problem.
Yeah, none of that is a problem because things need to exist or other things existence is comprised on different levels of generality.
So a more particular change means on a more general level, it's not changing.
Then if you look at general level, you can see it's changing there because on a more general level, it's not changing.
And what is the ultimately, not changing on the most general level, it's the nature of form, nature of feeling, nature of perception, nature of determination, nature of consciousness.
That's why the five aggregates always remain that which is in common to any life you have before or none of life you're going to have ahead.
So you can think, ah, so the five aggregates are myself then because that remains I'm changing.
No, that changes too.
But nature in regard to that remains the same because there is a change in a more particular level.
So, Antonio or Craig when he was born and he's lay life, the whole time spent in aging and growing and changing on that particular level, yeah, that's all real.
Equally, as it's real to refer to that whole person as Craig, Antonio, when he was young or whatever.
People say that's not a real thing.
Well, exactly.
So that's why she says, why is that a problem?
Vajira, the nuns, it's just the aggregates and the term, the designate in them.
That's not a problem.
The problem is, and always has been, suffering being arising, suffering ceasing, suffering arising in regard to this suffering in regard.
So the whole structure of general particular, it's completely relevant.
I mean, it's relevant in a sense that it's confused as a source of problem, but it's not actually the source of problem, which is what it says.
When dirty aggregates, you call it a creature. It's merely suffering that comes into being, suffering that stands and suffering that disappears.
That's the issue, there has always been the issue, and you fix that, you fix all of the issues, nothing else.
So, denying the reality of designation, saying, well, this is just an empty convention.
As such, it is real. What's the problem?
If it's empty of four, what's the problem?
Saying that it's an empty convention means you just designated further the original convention, or designation.
You designate the creature, and it's an empty designation of a creature.
And you can go indefinitely like that, infinitely, it's just the same thing. It's still a designation.
Because people can say, it was never an issue.
However, I was African, now I'm British, you see, the definitions aren't real.
Which is basically all revolves around denying their suffering.
Because if you deny the reality of things that are apparently causing you to suffer, you feel like you did dealt with your suffering.
But it's a wrong view, it's a big mistake from the start, because neither designations nor anything external was ever the reason for your suffering.
Because if you were, freedom from it would not be possible, why?
Because those things arise at their own.
Which means suffering would always be manifested on its own, which means you have no say in it.
But that's not the case.
So being a subtle designation, a coarse designation, an empty designation, a full designation, be it a real thing, or unreal thing.
All of those are manifested phenomena, and as such, they're external.
Which means they're never the reason for suffering. It's craving in regard to them.
In regard to what you feel, in regard to how we perceive things and so on, that the suffering is there.
Presence of craving means presence of suffering.
Absence of craving is absence of suffering.
Leaving the whole domain of designations far back gets intact in that sense.
But because you don't discern that, because a person's pathogen that does not see the origin of suffering as an awful truth,
he assumes automatically, and that's why every pathogen that has in common, you can't do this by accident.
You can't do it wrongly by accident.
Every pathogen assumes that when he suffers in regard to something, it's that something that's the reason for his suffering.
Then you can sort of, on the clueless level, you hate people.
Or you said something, he's a bad person, because I'm suffering in that account.
It's actually 100% his fault that I suffer.
Then you might work through that attitude and realize, well, be that as you may,
I really don't have to say about other people, so you might start refining it.
But you won't be able to go further than blaming designations for suffering.
Pain blaming the apparent reality of things for your suffering, which is the ultimate reaching point,
which is not really ultimate of any kind, of Machiallum Buddhism or any other.
Well, even the contemporary terravada Buddhism would deny, which denies the reality of things through western science,
is proven, the things are constantly changing, thus nothing is real, thus see.
It's all an illusion.
It's a completely mistaken point, a mistaken view, a mistaken direction, that the only purpose of it is
to allow you to keep denying things, so not to suffer immediately, or account of it.
But it's not freedom from suffering, it's just management.
Because in order to deny, well, the fact that you need to deny means you're affected first.
Now you need to deal with it, and denial will be a form of dealing with it.
But so do bananas, and then others, they don't have to act upon the unpleasant feeling at all.
They don't need to do anything, on account of unpleasant feeling there's a reason why, because they don't suffer.
They have pulled out the first arrow, so they're not hit by the second arrow,
of needing to do things when you experience pain.
So, psychotherapy, psychology, contemporary Buddhism, every other religion are all forms of management
of the suffering, because you don't know the escape from it in the first place.
Thus, your best legal selection is to manage it.
Whether you manage it to explain it in a way, oh, it's my chemical imbalance, that's why I suffer.
Well, it's because my parents were not supportive of me when I was young,
or well, no, it's because everything is not real.
All of these are mere conventions.
You think you exist, but you don't.
You think pain is real, but it's not.
All of those revolve around the same thing.
I don't know the way out of this pain.
So, I'm just trying to justify it, try to explain it, blame me externally, but never really understanding it.
Because if you were, then, yeah, parents didn't love me, that's a fact.
But it's not a fact on account of which I have to suffer.
Things are real around real, well, if I, the fact that I can say the things are unreal, that's real.
That designation is real.
So, their lack of reality might pertain to a more particular level, if you didn't know, that wasn't real.
But on a more general level, as a designation, if you just utter,
that you're able to think of, that you're able to direct and designate, it's real.
So, it's a contradiction in terms of saying, oh, this is not real.
Because if it's not real, it just wouldn't be manifested.
You wouldn't be able to even think about it, let alone speak and point at it.
So, all of that confusion comes out of the result, as a result of not knowing the way out of suffering that has arisen.
Seeing something arisen, and then trying to make it not be what it is.
And because you're suffering, you got to it.
So, it would be as if a person is sick, terminal ill, and there is no parent cure.
So, in the end, he just started denying his illness.
Well, it's not real.
His life is not real to begin with.
So, it starts dismissing at all, because it's, it alleviates suffering to some degree.
Through bad faith, through ignoring, through turning a blind eye and so on.
It doesn't fix the illness at all. It doesn't affect it in any way.
It just makes you know, you get it.
And the attitude of not looking is nothing else than the attitude of ignoring.
And ignoring is what a VJ is.
It's not, I think I've said it many times before.
It's not a physical veil of ignorance that is sort of being uncovered one day.
If you were lucky, or if you made enough of the right mystical effort for whatever else.
Ignorance is act of bad faith, act of ignoring, act of not acknowledging, act of assuming.
All of those acts maintain the act of ignorance.
So, you're fully responsible for the religion.
You're maintaining it in your daily actions.
Obviously, not on a particular level.
Or rather, you won't find it, you won't discern it on a particular level.
It's there, but you won't discern it.
But you have to discern it on a more general level, which is where it arises.
And general level being in regard to the nature of things.
Because you can say this is not real.
The nature of that statement, the nature of that experience is real.
It's manifested as such.
So, that's why all these things need to be allowed to arise.
Why? Because that's where the problem is, in their arising.
That's why they're impermanent.
The problem is you not seeing that impermanent.
Thus, you end up putting everything else on the top.
All you have to do is to start discerning impermanence within the heart of things.
Because they have a reason, not because they're ceasing.
And the whole thing will sort of...
Like in the cartoon, when you see a knitted jumper and a cap just pulls one string
and the whole thing just gets undone eventually.
Well, that's exactly the point.
If you get the right one and you stick to the right one, stick to the right view.
It will unravel everything else.
Trying to stop something from going up?
That's good.
Okay, well.
Yeah, but in terms of the nature of things, they're overrides.
But if you just leave it as that, you can say it is impermanent.
But you have to know it.
You can't just naturally...
The dammit as the universal law, as the universal path that has always been there can be walked is there.
But that's not to say that you're already walking it.
So the impermanence is generally in those things. Because if it weren't, you wouldn't be able to find it there.
But that's the thing. You need to discern it. You need to find it.
Because it's there, that discernment is possible.
And you'll find that out when you discern it.
So until you discern it, you have to have faith that it's discernible.
And that you're doing ignorance?
Well, exactly. Because if you're just being with things, you're just being with it, but you're not doing anything.
So that's why you can't...
Like that's why you need all of these, like, you know, so many sutras and...
And countless numbers of instructions and descriptions and incarnations and pointers and so on,
that the Buddha was going around teaching.
Well, because if you just stay with things, well, you're just staying with your ignorance.
You need to know what to look for.
Yeah. You can't keep throwing more rubbish onto the thing you're trying to discern.
So there is that. There is just staying with the thing that has a reason, not piling up more.
But then that's just...
Okay, now that you've got it, now you need to start doing the work.
Now that you learn how not to keep throwing more rubbish on your experience in terms of the wrong views and so on,
you learn that. You get established in that.
That's a starting point now, so you can begin a proper work.
Or like you're taking further.
But usually people, you will hear, you know, Buddhist monks, archons, whoever,
that's what everything will come in it.
And every religion teaches that in one form or the other.
Just sort of either through denying the world or whatever,
but you arrive at the point of just being with things and that's it.
Just let it flow.
Just let it flow. Just be here now, present, aware in the present moment.
Don't judge. Don't do this. Don't do that. Just be. Just be.
Just be, feeling to see that, yeah, good.
Now that you're just being, you have to start discerning that very just being a problem.
That's where the problem is.
Everything else that you thought the problem was was just extra.
On top of your problem, there was preventing you to see it.
Now that you learn how to just be mindful and simplify your life,
that's like before you begin the practice.
So it's a prerequisite.
It's not to be confused as a final goal.
I mean, it's so far from it that it's just like, it's still wrong.
You're still protruding and you can still be just present with things with your protruding mind,
with your protruding ignorance.
And you can spend your whole life because ignorance, one, can't get undone by itself.
Because it's not there by itself, you're doing it.
So you have to learn how to stop doing it and that's how it's done.
So if you don't learn how to stop doing it, you just be, you're just being with it.
Yeah, that's the point.
That's you, you're doing it.
It's not doing itself. It's not faster upon you.
Ignorance is not given to you.
Yeah.
By maintaining it.
Exactly.
In the same sense, again, ignorance or whatever, any other awesome states you want to pick up
from the sutras, it's over where that craving is.
Or rather, it all shares the nature of that very craving, which is something you're doing in regard to things.
So in the same sense that you can say craving is the reason for your suffering, the direct reason for suffering.
Not that on account of which you crave, which results in suffering.
So nothing external is the direct reason for suffering except your craving in regard to it.
In the same sense, you can say ignorance is the reason for suffering.
Nothing external, but your attitude in regard to the external, the attitude of ignoring,
the attitude of turning up like the attitude of bad faith.
That's the reason for suffering.
It was a very distinct, this couple in Norway.
I think it's in Norway.
The government said that they need to register a baby.
They need to register a baby's name and refuse to do so.
So they were fined.
So they were forced to go and register the name for the baby.
So they called it B-X-J-A-I-Z-Z-I-2-T. Like it's 21-Lets.
There's a nurse ridiculous.
You need to register a problem.
It's too long as two.
So put A, another find the game.
You can't just call it A, you have to give it.
So there's an example that they were trying to get away from this whole institution, this whole society,
because that's the problem.
That was the cause of the assault.
I think that's why they suffer.
So they're not going to let their child go to the same society.
Fending to see that, showing the society is another attitude towards the society,
which in this particular case resulted in even more hassle for which they felt fully justified
in their anger and in a well because they, I'm sure, they thought they were right.
They're just equally deluded as the society that is put into name now.
Because there was never a problem.
Never a problem was no issue.
But yeah, it's a very common view.
As I said, in other schools of Buddhism, or other schools of Buddhism today, or other religions,
that's the most you can get, deny the reality by one mean or the other.
Why?
Because you mistakenly blend it from the start for the reason that you're suffering,
and denying of it removes the apparent reason of your suffering.
But it doesn't.
You're still, you're still able to suffer.
So you're just a management that it's a response.
And there isn't suffering.
It's not uprooting it.
It's not dealing with it.
It's not preventing it to arise in the future.
You, like you can spend your whole life managing your suffering.
At the end of it, you still remain prey to suffering as much as you were in the beginning.
You have not affected a grain of that nature of being prey to suffering,
being liable to suffer.
Because all you've been doing is managing the actual suffering,
or the prospect of actual suffering.
So it was like, you can also go and just ignore as hard as you can.
Yeah.
Oh.
You know, the mystical illusion.
Yeah.
Really enjoy the suffering.
Really get into it.
Yeah.
So it's not a problem anymore because you really want it.
Yeah.
You force yourself to want it.
All of that is a secondary attitude or other response.
Because you can't handle it.
In regard to the fact that it has a reason and you were affected by it.
So whether you're accepted or rejected.
Both accepted and rejected.
Neither accepted nor rejected.
Because there's nothing to accept nor reject.
All of those will be a form of response,
a reaction to the fact that it has a reason and it's struck you.
And the fact that you have no option but to respond.
But to react means you're striking yourself second time on account of it.
So if one has the understanding of such a plan.
Of such a plan.
The things are not mine.
Well, has that understanding of another?
Not self.
Then what stops him from not doing whatever he wants?
Whatever.
Is there a sort of mine?
Well.
So he'd abandoned his responsibility towards things.
He already comes it.
Yeah.
Well, it's an experience of liberation.
But the burden is laid out.
It's whether we compare it to the burden.
It is.
Yeah.
You overcut it.
Imagine.
As the sutras talk in the hands of Janas and similar.
You were imprisoned.
Your family left out there.
And you were it because you feel responsible.
Well, you're not just like your family.
You're fully thrown through, taking them as yours.
But you're knowing control over it.
So you're imprisoned and you worry.
What are they going through?
Are the bad things going to happen?
Are they going to lose them?
Are they going to kill or rape?
Who knows what?
And then you go out and you find them intact.
And then the relief from that burden of their responsibility
that you had no input in.
You feel.
Or crossing that there's all of those other similes.
So it is.
Generally feeling like laying out a heavy burden.
And it's a good question.
What stops him from doing it?
Nothing stops him.
What stops him is the requirement of seal of being established
first before the Dharma takes place.
Because there was established when the Dharma took place
and the self-view has been abolished and so on.
He can't revert back to those things
that were requiring that self-view
which was the unwholesome behaviors.
So he sets it up.
But then exactly.
He lets go of that as well.
Which is letting go of seal of the Parmasa.
Letting go of virtue and duty.
And that's an extreme relief.
When you lay down your duty.
You don't have to do anything.
Expand yours to have just sleeping.
Some people say to you.
But what about your mother?
She's suffering.
And you should go in the past.
Because they're still speaking out of their self-view.
Out of their sense of duty, they're still burdened by.
But it's making me suffer.
They are sufferers.
Exactly.
They do it because it's their person.
But obviously somebody can misinterpret this
and say, OK.
So you just start denying everything and say,
this is real, this is real.
This must be lacking to whatever one with what people do.
But no.
That's why the order is not negotiable.
The order of things.
Seala comes first.
Then the Dharma can take place.
Without a sealer, whatever took place,
you can be sure that it's not the Dharma.
So.
And they always say that.
The Buddha, when he talks in the sutras,
when you would say, then in the center,
that the knowledge has been developed
because his behavior has been purified beforehand.
So whatever he understood, he understood because, OK.
He really made the effort to understand
and his behavior has been purified beforehand.
He has a sense of shame.
Exactly.
Yeah.
And then.
So.
The center of shame and fear of wrongdoing and the whole sealer,
it's not the Dharma.
But it's a necessary ground for the Dharma to take place.
And when the Dharma does take place,
you abandon that ground as well.
That's why, you know, practicing them,
you go beyond good ambiance.
But I mean that that ground gets undone.
No.
No.
It stays.
Because they always will be a ground.
You prepare it and now you take off.
And that ground is left.
Obviously, there are different, you know,
different people, different grounds,
different levels of preparing the ground,
different habits, different sound.
So there are many different areas in the suitors,
getting up to all sorts of relatively serious mischief.
And which is why they're sort of the good or the least things
that sort of one I cannot do.
And there's no mention that he's not able to break any of the precepts.
What sort of one I cannot do?
Well, the person who has prepared the ground
and then left the ground laid on the burden
does not care anymore.
He can't kill the Buddha.
Kill another hand.
Well, he could have killed his mother.
Kill his father.
He can't take any determination as permanent.
Any determination is not suffering.
He can't take any reason, Dhamma, as his self.
He can't take anybody else other than the Buddha,
as his teaching.
And that means he can't take any other teaching,
completely different to the understanding of the Dhamma,
as a teaching.
So his criteria of the Dhamma is so established
that if he comes across any other teaching,
it will only be, ah, this occurs to the Dhamma or this doesn't.
But he can't stop and then start something completely different.
Those are the things that he can't do.
He can break, he can lie, he can cheat, he can steal,
he can break all the precepts.
I suppose even if he's pushed in some extreme circumstances,
he might be able to kill as well.
Not just, not that he wouldn't, um,
reap the vipakas or subtractions.
But, um, it wouldn't be, as the Buddha said,
it wouldn't be as bad as the other,
the other forms, like, as you know, when you have a,
you have a little cup of water and you drop one drop of dye,
everything is dye, black, you just put black.
But then if you have 100 liters of water,
one drop of dye will make a difference.
It's still a drop of dye, a stain, impurity,
but because things have changed,
that's why he can't be lower than a human.
He doesn't say what kind of human?
Like, if he has been a very misbearing sort of guy,
most likely it's going to, it's still be a human,
but probably in a very, very bad, bad state,
bad position, bad so on.
But the thing is again, somebody will drive you
to go to such an extent of killing,
it's a big stretch, not impossible,
because the Buddha didn't list it as impossible,
but quite unlikely.
But all of the other things are sort of smaller nature.
That's still very much.
So there's a fear, if you say that there's not mind,
or you have that realise that you become a subsequent,
but then you have a responsibility to another person,
say a child, whatever person,
and you fear that if you lose that sense of responsibility,
that this child will suffer,
and account for that, because you won't feed it anymore.
So there's a fear of losing all sense of shame.
Oh, please.
Well, that's exactly why these things are a burden,
are a yoke.
That's why family, friends,
duties and responsibilities,
they're like ties, they tie you.
They obstruct you for that reason,
because it's not easy.
Why? Because, yeah,
you need to realise your own child,
your own children,
their wealth, anything.
You need to leave the whole thing,
yet your success is not guaranteed by doing that,
because that's only a preparation,
that's only setting up the ground.
There's no guarantee you'll succeed,
yet, if you were to succeed,
you do have to leave it completely,
utterly, 100% beforehand.
You're right.
That's why they wouldn't, you know,
they're not going,
not, not, not, not,
they refuse in the beginning to teach the householders,
because they would understand that,
and they would take it on,
as, you know, obviously,
a worth thing to do,
and they would leave the families,
they would then go through ruin and die,
and, you know, no man in the house,
and that's it, they're done.
So it would affect lives of many people,
so they said,
okay, well, don't teach it.
Like, if they find out,
and they don't find,
but don't be directly responsible for that,
just because it will affect other aspects of the order,
and people are hating,
or whatever,
and so on.
So in the long run,
you'll see it's better.
But still, like that,
it's just like, you know,
to be coming out on something,
but there are many sort of punishments
back in the Buddha's day,
they would just lay householders.
And when they were in the Buddha's father,
came to him,
and his tears upset,
they stroked,
because the Buddha took his grandson,
the Buddha's son,
Rahola.
So imagine his state of mind,
and then the Buddha coming down,
and then getting the teaching,
and then he understood,
and he became a sotapana,
right there and then.
And then he said,
okay, well, thank you.
I do have to go,
because, you know,
we always are very busy,
and so,
I have things to do.
Sotapana said that,
I've only become a sotapana.
So it's not that big a deal,
but in a sense,
it is.
But in another sense,
it isn't.
Because there's still a lot to be done.
How can we see the downman
by contemplating designation?
What is another word for designation?
By contemplating that designation
is not a problem to begin with,
you will learn to allow
those more ambiguous,
less palpable phenomena,
so to speak,
such as designations and turns,
and signs and tokens,
to exist,
to arise.
By not allowing them,
you don't see them,
or rather,
by thinking they're the problem,
by denying them,
by blaming them,
by undoing them,
by whatever else people would do.
Means you wouldn't see them in the nature,
which means you're not seeing the nature of phenomena,
which means you're not seeing
the nature of arising.
So,
you could see the dharma
by learning how not to interfere
with the designations
and what they designate.
By not maintaining the blame on them
for your suffering,
but by learning how to leave it as it is,
then eventually you'll see
where the suffering does come from,
which is not them.
For as long as you think they're the problem,
you'll be trying to fix them,
which means you'll be misdirecting your efforts externally,
outwardly.
Not recognizing that there is a further suffering,
as the sister,
Roger Dunn said,
merely the suffering arising,
suffering standing.
That's what the problem is.
So,
you don't have to worry about designations,
as long as you're not spending your time blaming them
for your suffering.
And saying,
well,
I don't exist anyway.
My name,
my ethnicity,
my nationality,
just empty convention,
it's not real,
thus,
when I experience pain,
that's not real either.
That's a completely gratuitous connection,
and it doesn't work,
which is why it doesn't feel from suffering.
So, that's how.
The designations cover quite a domain.
Normal.
Well,
there is no just normal,
or there is no just Rupa.
So, everything is designated,
that's what I'm saying.
That's what I'm saying before.
Even you saw,
like,
I'm not calling this,
and you just called it,
like,
like that.
I'm not going to giving any name to this.
You just name this as such.
So, name,
as a name of matter,
it's not optional.
So, I'm doing the name.
It's ridiculous.
You cannot do the name
or you cannot do the form.
Because it's not you're doing anyway.
Yes.
Designation is not you're doing.
Even if it's in regard to it,
it is.
But to see that,
normal Rupa,
not just normal.
Yes, there is no just normal.
I mean, you can discern the aspect of
normal in normal Rupa.
In the same sense,
you can discern the resistance aspect
of Rupa in normal Rupa,
but there is no just normal just Rupa.
And normal Rupa would,
in other words,
it's the all.
There can also be appearance.
Everything that appears,
exactly.
But,
with wrong view,
it exists.
When it says,
the all means everything.
From things that's seemingly more material
to like, you know,
vague and biggest abstract thoughts.
Again,
that's as a designation,
it has its matter,
which is right here
and then the presence of that living body
or whatever else.
The experience has a whole
number of Rupa remains,
and you can't even
conceal that now being so.
No,
yes.
Designation is just,
it's not just label.
No.
It's a label.
It's a designated designation.
Are you labeled it intentionally
intended something,
decided on top of the already
inclinations that you had?
Oh, you think that's a label?
Oh, this is,
I call this table.
I label it as such and such,
in such and such regard.
So that's just like a very proliferated designation,
you can say.
It still shares the same nature of designation.
And if you realize the nature of designation,
you will realize that labeling was never the problem.
It's kind of inevitable.
If you abstain from the label,
you label it like that.
In the same sense,
you can't stop choosing,
can't stop making decisions,
receiving.
You can't stop receiving.
You can't stop feeling.
Or you can do is,
step outside of the whole thing.
Or I would not step outside literally,
but surmount the whole thing,
so you're not affected by it.
And as the weather said,
even the target that uses designations
such as I am,
I am this, I was like that.
But he does not confuse that designation
for his sense of self.
It does not stand anymore
for the wrong view of the self.
He is clearly there.
So now it's a true,
just an empty designation,
in that sense,
not empty of everything,
empty of its reality.
It's empty of appropriation.
So when, so when,
I saw his bonuses,
not mine.
He doesn't take that,
knowledge as he is.
But therefore in our hands,
he doesn't say not mine.
He doesn't have to say that.
He doesn't have to say that.
He doesn't have to say that.
He doesn't have to say that.
But what puttuja Nakando,
he can deny the whole world,
say it's not mine.
But what he cannot see
is not mine,
he's actually denying the whole world.
But as though he can see himself
with not self,
he can see not self with self.
He can see himself with self.
But he can't see him not self with not self.
So then again,
which is why he's suffering?
Yeah.
The male what arises,
it's not appropriation.
It's not his.
So he sees not self,
not self,
not self.
And he needs to persist in it,
so the things
won't even arise anymore
with the author of self.
That's the standing of determining.
Yeah, you can say so.
And if you were,
because if you were not able to designate,
you'd be dead.
But that's not Nirvana.
And actually there is that,
that sort of, yeah,
it says if an infert,
if the consciousness turns away
from the name and form,
wood.
Oh yeah.
It's based on the resistance and designation.
A lot about that.
Yeah.
With name and matter as condition,
consciousness.
So it was said,
how it is, and under that with name and matter as condition,
there is consciousness.
It should be seen in this manner.
Even on the consciousness,
but not to obtain a stay in name and matter,
wood future arising,
coming into being of birth,
aging death,
and pleasure suffering,
be manifest,
you wouldn't.
So therefore,
that's the reason,
that's the occasion,
that it's the arising,
that this is the condition of consciousness
that's the same name and matter.
Thus far and under,
may one be born,
or aged,
or die,
or fall,
that's far,
is there a way of designation,
as far as designations can go.
Thus far there is a way of language,
thus far there is a way of description,
thus far there is a sphere of understanding,
thus far the round precedes
as manifestation in a situation.
So far,
that is to say,
as there is name and matter,
together with consciousness.
And for other rounds,
like here at the end of the day,
they say the same name.
They say the same name,
but they might.
Yeah, well, the faculty is a different,
more limited and so on,
so they wouldn't have...
They don't have the confidence in themselves.
The theory of awareness.
Yeah, but,
animal,
they might not be able to speak,
but they have,
that which stands in the form of speech.
The sounds they make,
the expressions,
and it's a form of,
it's much more obviously crude,
simpler, more general,
animal,
but the far hungry,
it's a far hungry,
and the round,
be it a deva round,
or the,
or the,
animal round,
or the hero round,
there is no.
Absence of,
well, like,
oh, I have only two aggregates,
but something on it.
Just the far right,
it's the nature of things.
It's just their composition,
the ways of going about,
might be different for an animal,
than a human,
which is why an animal
is more unfortunate,
than a human.
But it's still the same deva.
And that's why,
it's,
it's such a perilous round
to be an animal round.
You don't have awareness
of your choice,
yet you are choosing,
and you're fully responsible
for the results of that choice.
So an animal can't help,
dog can't help but chase after things,
or hunt things,
cat can't help but killing.
But it's still responsible for it.
Doesn't mean,
oh, it can't help,
it's not a fault,
it is a fault.
The far right,
it's a,
it is a form of choice.
Yet,
there is not enough awareness
for that choice to be recognized,
so they just go
with the most obvious inclination
that they would have,
which is why it's so hard to step
outside of the animal round,
because you're just perpetuating
the bad action,
action,
action fully immersed,
in greed,
aversion, delusion,
completely.
So you would really need
an external circumstances,
a stroke of luck
to get back from an animal round,
for which,
you're responsible going to,
in the first place,
through your bad actions
in other,
better out.
And that stroke of luck
is basically,
that simulator
of the blind third
coming up,
once every 500 years,
to the top of the sea,
just for a second,
and sticking its head
to a yoke
that's been floating around
and thrown around
by winds and waves.
I mean, what are the chances?
And those are the chances
of somebody
from an animal round
to come back.
So that's why, like,
there is some, like,
looking after an animal,
helping an animal,
feeding it,
does, in a sense,
like, by making an animal
restrained itself.
And nature restrained
is there,
in its behavior,
and it's such,
it will count,
bit by bit,
eventually,
in the future.
Yeah,
they're not,
they're not,
they're not,
they didn't willingly
choose that restraint.
By the fact that the restraint
was imposed upon them,
in the sense of weight
before you jump on your food.
Means, there is a phenomenon
always strained present
in their experience
right there, right then.
A wholesome phenomenon present.
And what I said,
in these unwholesome rounds,
like,
completely always in darkness,
even a tiny little spark
light can mean,
a lot.
That's what I look after, though.
In cats,
in a bird,
in a monkey.
