So the first step is that if you know for yourself what's wholesome as wholesome, wholesome,
wholesome as unwholesome and then you can see increasing in you or decreasing you and
then you can see sometimes circumstances being responsible for it, sometimes not when
they are you know what all life exchange is in certain times, if they're not, if it's
not the circumstances to be blamed then you are, I'm not making enough effort or I'm becoming
careless or something like that, but either way comes down to being self-transparent and
you see through that and then knowing how to act because as I said if you see that
at like initial stage you don't need a great amount of effort to keep it on the course.
So for somebody sure too don't like this might be great but then also living in a secluded
is great, if I don't have a secluded and I'm living through them well I'll just keep doing
what I have because it's good enough, if I have secluded and I don't have to go through
them well I'll keep doing that, it's not black and white and it's determined basically
by your message that you need to be honest with yourself about and it's often actually
more about recognizing what unwholesome is because if there is no unwholesome you most likely
can practice wholesome when you're doing fun, that's the thing once you can recognize
the unwholesome and keep that at bay then I can start moving more freely and I might
happen if that's my thing to go through them, because there is no increase in unwholesome
and even the one that and then you can exactly within that you can start defining it further
oh not just that there is no increase in unwholesome, there is also a decrease in unwholesome
so I might do that more now, yeah, if you don't know what you're doing and you're just
trying to take an external form on an expectation that that would, well most of the most of the
practice is exactly that, but it's not such a thing, there is not such a thing as half
a practice for you, yeah good luck with that, but yeah, people who project
for other whom is place where the practice is, would hold on to the rules is practice,
would hold on to the etiquette is practice, would hold on to observances is practice as
a virtuous practice and it's nothing other than still about the Paramahansa, and those
same people would also think circumstances of practice, to monastery of the practice,
keeping up to the routines is a practice, never ever using any of those things like as
a basis to reflect upon their mind themselves choosing, intending, being responsible for all
of that in the first place, so that's why you know you can spend 50 years in roles as
a monk following all the routines perfectly, doing everything perfectly, but never have
a moment of proper reflection, so basically as you asked before what if the seconds
are provided both, wholesome and a wholesome, it's a wholesome day, you know you might have
a pot of curd, shillunk and curd, and half of it is good, half of it went off, and it's
all kind of mixed, even good bit is off, because you can distinguish it, so you want to focus
on not having the increase of one wholesome, but not having the increase of one wholesome,
that's already wholesome, and then you take that further through your effort, refining
the circumstances, refining the things you do throughout the day, you take that further
so that it starts to bring in the increase in one wholesome, but again all of this turns
to the very general wholesome and wholesome, they need to be like that, general like that,
because that's how you recognize them, you recognize the nature of one wholesome, the
nature of wholesome, and exactly as we said before, for somebody walking around charikas
and pudongs, but then out of complete restlessness, or some romantic ideals, and you know lots
of monks do, lots of monks live quite a number of months really harder, and two dongs
or whatever else, and then they come in common civilizations, they fall apart, they get angry,
they get angry, they get lost, they get pissed, they disrobe, and you know what you've been
doing all this time walking around, you clearly haven't been practicing, because if you were
you wouldn't be affected by those unwholesome states when they do eventually rise.
So the whole point is, whatever you choose to do as a form of practice is to be fortifying
yourself, against the farmers, against the hindrances, and become stronger, and obviously
develop wisdom through that, but if you know somebody, again perfect monk keeps all the
things, sits eight hours a day, and then he dissolves, well, but did that do to him?
Maybe things that stir you up, and so you think, I'm fine, yeah, and people often would think
that, yeah, they would often think that if there is no transparency to recognize, okay, I'm
fine now, but would I be fine if those things would arise, they unwholesome things, would
they go into the city, going into the village, every day, for his arms, they have to keep
his strength?
Well, exactly, that's where you can see it.
Because you know, often people would stop and wonder, why are monks not allowed to grow
the food, because you can go and live on top of the mountain, drawing around food, and
never see anywhere?
Well, that's exactly why, because lots of people use that as a form of escape, and never
develop any wisdom, and on top of that, means the dharma wouldn't actually be drawn to others,
but by being in some marginal contact, with lay people, with people who are not monks,
who are not practicing, they get to see it, they get married, and you actually get to
be kept in check, like yourself, you get to measure, you get to measure, you get to see
whether your hindrance is arising, decreasing, if you just live in your mountain, you get
used to that, you have your own comfort, self-sustainable, you don't see any, oh yeah, it's
nice and romantic, but it's quite likely you aren't going to be pushing yourself as hard
as you should, but these things will prevent you from being complacent.
So there needs to be that kind of, ah, okay, no, I do dependant people, so I can't just
run off.
But you can't go now, you know, in the middle of it, you go and catch it in a bar, kind
of thing.
Oh, I'm going to test myself, if you're older, they have a mental state with testing
yourself, you're older, they're affected by the nature of those things, because if you
are not affected by nature of those things, well, if you're not affected by the nature
of things you're testing yourself in regard to, you wouldn't need to test yourself.
Means, but if you're doubting whether you're going to be affected or not, that's already
a form of being affected, but if you're doubting, oh, with these sites affecting me, so I
go and test myself, means, well, you're already affected by that doubt.
And then you needed to prove that to yourself, ah, by going and testing, you're exposed
going to the town or to a bar to see how you're going to react.
That's just completely like a wisdom.
First of all, oh, I'm trying to overcome this, thus any exposure won't help, even in
a form of testing myself, why would I need to test myself if I know this needs to be
well done, and truly overcoming something is when you become indifferent towards it.
And then even the idea of testing yourself means, well, why would I need to test my strength
when I know I'm strong?
I don't need to go and keep flexing.
But if you doubt whether you're strong enough, then you have to go and keep doing that.
So what you want to do is not keep testing yourself in silly, unwise ways, you actually
want to remove the doubt in regard to it.
And that's it.
And for as long as I demand seal, nothing can enter to it.
Okay, so again, I'm a bit lost, but if I'm sitting in the crew team, and I can't,
yeah, I can't down, nothing's going on, it's just neutral, neutral feeling generally.
Yeah, I can easily become complacent, but I have to keep on looking where, where do I have
to keep going?
Well, if everything is, if there are no disturbances of any kind, you do have sutras, you do have
study, and you do have knowledge that you are not sotapana yet.
Which means there is a task for me to do, and all the circumstances are quite suitable,
so I need to do it, I need to keep doing it.
I think even a state of just.
Then once you become sotapana, get the right view, then it's purely about recognizing
wholesome and avoiding unwholesome.
And if you stick to it with restrained, with renunciation, with things that are required
for different people, for different mindsets, different predispositions, that's it.
If you stick to it, as Janavira said, by practicing neck and a sun couple, the thoughts
of renunciation and intention of renunciation, you become like a tower of strength.
And then, you know, the knowledge arises and so on, and the person becomes tired, over
comes sensuality and so on.
All this everything is to start with the right view, there is no practice, there is no right
view.
Yes, yes, yes.
The right view makes the whole noble age of path, right?
There is no such thing as you get this, a bit of that, a bit of this.
So you have the suitable enough circumstances, get the right view, spend the time trying
to get the right view.
And you know, there are like, again, many different ways you can get to the right view.
Obviously, it's the right way, the same understanding of the same nature, but if people can
arrive through contemplating different things, contemplating wholesome and unwholesome, wise
and wholesome and wholesome, avoiding it, abandoning it, not tolerating, not entertaining
it.
When the mind gets like, it used to wholesomeness, you start recognizing it, you start grasping
the sign of your own mind.
And then, you know, the impermanence and other things become much easier to sort of see
in the right context.
I need to ask you, like, need a clarification about something, just that, I read and I heard
about this something called one-check-a-dama, basically sort of like, illusion or sort of,
basically, I don't know how, like, for me, it sounded like an unwholesome, unwholesome
nature of a thought or a process, but there was this article, but it was written by a monk,
it was about having unwholesome, wholesome and a third to be one-check-a-dama, basically
when you recognize something to be wholesome, but in reality, it's unwholesome, for example,
like, let's say this dog, like, goes on and I'm trying to catch that hair and I stop it.
In a way, I'm saving the hair, so I do have good merits or sort of wholesome, but then
again, I'm stopping the dog, or in the process, I get the dog, right, right, and so what
is the, what's the question, what's the context of that?
What are you saying?
I'm asking, like, basically, is there a third, like, that sort of thing, like, one-check-a-dama
is there, is it a third sort of act or sort of thought process, or is it still just unskillful
and...
A third as opposed to wholesome, unwholesome, and then wholesome and unwholesome.
Yeah.
Yeah, there is, there is meditaries, the meditaries, and now the meditaries are no meditaries,
so basically saving somebody, saving the life of, again, something, something is more,
something's less.
So, if you just prevent the dog from eating by preventing him from killing a hair and
you save the life of that hair, that's obviously more wholesome.
It's unwholesome if you're going to end up committing, but it's not as unwholesome
if you kill the dog.
Well, if you kill the dog, that's much worse here, because you wouldn't have been killing
the hair in the first place, it would have been the dog.
So, again, you always need to look it from your point of view, from the point of view of
your action, like, you know, locked in the people when they say, well, what if I killed
one person who was about to kill 500, I saved 500?
Well, it wasn't your responsibility to save 100, but it was your responsibility to not
kill anyone.
Yeah.
And you can't avoid that, as well.
Yeah.
So, yeah, there are things that the neither pleasant or untranslatable, neither
militaries nor militaries, neither good nor bad, mixed.
Be the both, or be the bad.
Yeah, the one-taker means, like, sort of, like, but why is there a relevant, I don't
understand what to, because there was, in that article, it was divided into three sections,
rather than having wholesome, or unwholesome, for, like, when it's wholesome, or unwholesome,
you know, if this is wholesome, this is wholesome, if it's not wholesome, to me, sounds like
that article was talking about, comma, and then the ritual, if we park of it, like, all
what you do, that is good comma, or your bad comma.
But, basically, the term one-taker means one-taker is in, like, dishonest, old, like, to
con some one sort of thing, like, so this dumbness, this, this, this, makers, are conning, or this
honest sort of.
But, again, it's always in relation to an act of one kind or the other, so I suspect the
whole article was written with that in mind, like, you know, because you are, I do good,
I'll be reborn in heaven, or I'm making merit, well, there are things that con you think
you're doing good, but you're not, but that's not what we've been talking about, in terms
of wholesome, and unwholesome, in terms of practice, is what you recognize where your
intention is rooted, whether your intention is rooted in greed, aversion, delusion,
if you recognize your rooted in that, you do not do it.
Yeah.
So in that sense, there is no neutral there, basically, it's either good, or it's either
bad.
Yeah, that's the problem.
And if you start seeing like that, recognizing that it's not rooted in bad, that's what
makes it good, good for the practice, that's what it means, suitable for the practice.
And from the point of view of karma, like if what you've done happens to be like this
or like, well, you've done that, but you will know for sure that it's impossible to have
an action, a deed done while it was rooted in wholesome, not in unwholesome, to result
in unwholesome, you can't have that.
So you kind of bring it back to the source, you stop speculating about this particular thing
means that, or if I do this, if you mean that, or, no, you just bring it really, really
to the source, which is your intention, and then you know, my intention was not rooted
in unwholesome, and you don't have anything to worry about.
But if you don't see that, then yeah, then you have to worry about external and what
other people say, it's good or bad, and then you're trying to get your way by pondering
on those things.
But actually, you just need to bring it down to the very point of origin, and then you
will know.
So, I think that's more about, again, about authenticity of it, it's absolutely prerequisite
for everything right.
It's like, you can think of something as you're doing wholesome, but you're ignorant to
a little more.
Yeah, I mean, you know, people think various things that are socially or in the environment
you live accepted as good and wholesome, but you can be doing it for completely unwholesome
reasons.
And it's those reasons that matter.
Yeah, it's not the external, traditional way of people, what people say, no one knows
what wholesome and unwholesome is.
It's accepted based on, kind of, some general knowledge, but it's not something that's
on the cell accurate.
Whatever you're asking to do, it might be.
Yeah.
Whatever is the case.
Yeah.
Oh, it's good.
This is the right to do it, but why are you doing it?
Like things can be externally neutral, nobody would mind, but you know you're doing it
for absolutely wrong reasons, so you're going to do it.
And sometimes things can be perceived negatively externally, people can complain, but you'd
know you're not doing it for the bad reasons, so you don't have to worry about doing it.
So what it comes down to is that, like, can I say, like, if it's wholesome, like, if
it's not wholesome, it is unwholesome, if it's not unwholesome, it is wholesome.
And it comes down to the mind where your intentions are rooted, like, if it's neutral, then,
okay, it's not unwholesome, that's all it matters.
There can't be a neutral position, can it?
Well, it can be, like, certain, like, it doesn't affect anyone, it doesn't affect you,
it doesn't affect others in any way, in any shape of form, it doesn't affect anything.
But what about your volition, like, the intuition?
Well, even your volition doesn't really affect, doesn't care.
It doesn't come from my wholesome, it doesn't come from greed, it doesn't come from
delusion.
And in that sense, from the point of view of the practice, it's wholesome, that neutral
it's wholesome, because, well, it's certainly not an obstacle.
So, in between greed, abortion, and delusion, and wisdom, generosity, and, like, the counter
of those three.
Well, the counter of greed, the version delusion is non-greed, non-version, and non-delusion.
Non-delusion, yeah.
So, between those six, there's no other intention left, right?
If you're, if you're intending to doing something, either one of those things, or a modification
of those things.
In terms of where it's rooted, exactly, yeah, you have it by that, because, as you say
yourself, and as, you know, things in some case, there's a bit of mix, but the fact that
it's mixed, with unwholesome means, well, it's rooted in unwholesome.
Yeah, that's why I wasn't here a while ago.
And then if it's rooted in neutral, in a sense of, well, there's no greed, and non-greed
either, it's just complete indifference, by being like that, well, that's, that's wholesome.
So, if there is no greed, it's a non-greed.
Yeah.
If there is both greed and non-greed, in regard to various things, well, that's greed.
So the difference would come down to, like, the neutral feeling, for example, when it's
neither pleasure, nor this pleasure, it's being felt.
And it's actually a lot of the feeling, but if that feeling is not known, it's unpleasant,
it's delusional, it's unwholesome.
If that feeling is known, it's pleasant, and it's wholesome, and it's peaceful.
And it's, in itself, it's a neutral feeling, in that sense, you would have, like, a neutral
intention that doesn't result, neither in good, nor in bad.
But if it's unknown, as such, if it's not recognized for what it is, it's unwholesome.
If it's recognized for what is, it's wholesome, oh, okay.
So it's like your intention towards your feelings.
Because the intention towards the feelings would be whether there is craving, if it's a
proper intention, there wouldn't be craving, it's improper, there would be craving, in regard
to whatever you feel, good or bad or neutral.
If it's a proper intention, there's going to be craving, what's the proper intention?
The proper intention would be intention that would not lose the sight of impermanence.
For example, okay, keep having, keep having, keep having, keep having, keep having, keep
from having that in perspective, because it, there's that, what none of you ever wrote,
real quotes, I can't remember how to say exactly, any intention, which doesn't imply craving,
I think you understand?
Yeah.
Yeah.
An intention.
What is the, has the rest of the question there?
All that comment there.
Well.
An intention that doesn't imply craving.
A half thing can be understood.
Because how can you say, why?
How can you intend something without craving, without, that's just the duties towards feelings
that one has.
Well, basically the intention of effective ignorance will be
kind of over-intending, you can say, which is when you're craving.
But because there is no beginning of your craving, you've always been over-intending.
So the question is how to now learn through that over-intending,
through that craving for things, how to learn that actually intention can be
without you needing to over-intending or doing anything about it.
So it's more like discerning within that over-intending intention,
what in itself is just intention, and what is your doing on top of that?
Well, what you're doing.
And recognition, for example, of the fact,
well, recognition of intentions as phenomena is the very first step.
Yeah.
Because most of the people when they think intention, they immediately
that's my evolution, my direction, like, oh, intending this, intending this.
It's always, it's like a direction, being directed that way or this way.
And you don't see that as in the reason of phenomena.
You see that in regard to being manifest in regard to reason of phenomena.
Ah, this is the reason I'm going there.
This is it, I'm going there.
Oh, I'm running away from that.
I don't want that, I want that.
So it's always this movement.
I'm thinking about this.
So seeing the movement of your intention as a still phenomenon is the very first step.
And that means grasping the sign of your mind, grasping the still sign of your moving mind.
The thing is of your mind.
Exactly, because changing while standing, the third characteristic,
that's what movement is.
Whether it's moving away or towards, or away and towards whatever,
it's changing while standing or rather changing while remaining the same,
resisting while changing, depending on whatever translation you're going to use.
The point is, even if there is a movement, it can be not,
towards or away, that movement is a thing.
On a more general level, it's a single thing, single phenomenon,
that it's sort of moving, changing on particular level.
That's why the movement is possible, is because on a different level,
there is no movement.
If everything is moving constantly all the time, everywhere,
there wouldn't be movement at all, because it wouldn't be a reference point at all.
So recognizing the nature of intention as a movement,
but then being able to see that movement as a reason thing, while it's moving.
They will eventually, could lead to discerning, ah, the aggregate of intention,
the phenomenon of intention, means even the intention, even the most,
the quickest moving things of your mind, like this, that, this, that.
It's only possible, because it has a reason beforehand, as a whole.
And over that, you have no say.
So the only fact, you can move along a certain trajectory,
is because the trajectory has been given to you as a possibility to move.
And thus you can never create anything.
You can just go along with what has a reason, based on your choice.
And then you realize that even choosing left or right, or up or down,
is only possible, because all those directions are implied, given.
All those intentions are there.
So you're completely enclosed within that.
So there's many, there's infinite number of intentions,
or directions you can go.
Okay. But there is the thing called intention.
But it can move indefinitely.
You can say, let's say there is an infinite number,
and infinite ways that intention can move.
But all of those ways, all of those movements,
are possible only if the intention has a reason beforehand.
If there is no intention, you can't conceive a movement of that intention.
And there's many intentions.
You can say there is an infinite amount of movement,
of the given reason intention.
So you recognize, if the intention is the necessary cause,
the phenomenon of intention, the presence of intentionality,
is a necessary cause for any particular intention to be manifested.
You recognize that any particular intention that you engage in,
intentional intention, volition, whatever else,
is completely subordinate, completely dependent upon,
completely determined by the phenomenon of intention being present.
And if you discern that, you would have,
well, you have absolutely no say,
and you can't intend the phenomenon of intention.
Which means, you can't ever even conceive it to be yours.
Yet, because of, upon that very thing,
that is inconceivable to be yours,
your whole volition, your whole sense of self,
your whole intentionality, stands upon,
and it's completely determined by an inseparable form.
So by seeing that, and you recognize,
no matter how hard I will something of it,
it cannot, it's inconceivable to be taken as much,
it's impossible.
But fully discerning that impossibility,
you'll stop taking it as yours.
You're making a choice.
That's very much as we used to think.
That's where your sense of self sits.
The fact that you're able to choose.
But that's not, like again,
it's such a point.
So even potusion, I can get a hint of that.
You might be able to choose,
but while you're not able to not choose,
because even when you say I'm not choosing,
you've just chosen that.
So you're completely,
not to choose.
Yeah, if so, I'm referring to the choice
while you just chose to not choose.
There's another choice.
It was always a possibility,
if you chose to refrain from choice.
So you're always, which is wide,
which is exactly, that's the core of it.
The fact that you can't choose your way out of choice.
You can't intentionally stop impending it.
And that's exactly why you condemn to karma
and then the eventual results of it.
You can't stop performing karma.
You can't stop performing action,
which means you can't stop experiencing results
no matter how far ahead they are.
And that's why every intention,
every action is intention.
So if you condemn to such intentions
that you're no escape from,
means, oh, result will be,
it will result in action eventually,
which means, oh, whatever then results
of those actions are,
will fall onto me,
even if I have no say over that.
And you never had say in it from the beginning,
but by not knowing that,
you just kept doing it,
and kept appropriating it,
which means whatever came as a result of it later on,
was also falling on your, on your, on your end.
So all acts have results,
but born Abraham, they don't.
Well, on to anybody.
Every action is intention,
but then if you fully discern intentions,
none of those intentions will be yours.
Does anything that those intentions result in?
No.
Any acts don't actually,
won't be actually act,
because act, in a sense of karma,
is when the intention is appropriated
and they brought you to result in committing
an action of a kind,
which means then the results of those actions
will also be yours.
They will still be results.
So you can't, like you can say,
I'll stop performing actions,
because action karma is bad.
But if you don't address,
if you don't overcome,
if you stop appropriating your intention,
means you're not really abstaining from any action,
because from that point of view,
even not performing an action,
is a form of action.
That you find it.
Yeah.
And sooner or later,
you will be, you'll do something
that will be resulting in one way or the other.
You can't see,
you can see intention directly.
You can't, you can't.
Well, you can see the movement,
like if you're expecting to stop the intention,
to stop the movement in order to examine it,
means you're already looking at the wrong place.
You can't have anything in there.
The fact that there is a movement means
there is the phenomenon of movement
that is still,
basically, literally,
the trajectory you move
has to be given beforehand.
Otherwise, there is no movement.
So you don't have to stop the movement.
You just have to recognize its nature,
which is not moving.
Hence, the movement within that is possible.
Well, you, for, um,
intention,
because, because,
like if you want to phenomenologically describe it,
it would be a movement.
It's a movement,
movement of the mind,
movement of the speech,
movement of the action,
for the body,
depending on how far it takes you.
And the choice is a movement,
because of this, over that.
And while, because while you,
you have chosen something,
you choose something,
and it's,
and it's a bit...
Well, that already implies
the other things that you didn't choose.
Yeah, but while I'm,
I'm sitting now,
but I'm doing that,
so the mind,
intention to sit,
remains,
as long as I,
don't choose something else.
It's able to require you to stand up.
Yeah.
So I'm constantly,
if I wasn't choosing to sit down,
I would be doing something else.
Yeah.
And now,
you have made a choice of sitting down.
Now, you're not actively,
constantly choosing to remain seated,
but the fact that you've made that choice,
and your body is still seated,
means you're actively engaged in that choice.
Yeah, it's...
So you're engaged, it's active.
It's on.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Which is why the fourth,
um,
body postures can be, can be a good foundation of mindfulness.
Because within that,
now, any intentionality that you have,
will come from the intentionality of the seated body.
Which means you can't,
all of the other intentionalities,
it would exist on account of a different body posture,
are now excellent.
Uh...
You can't,
like now,
start intending things
that would require you to run,
or stand up,
without running or standing up.
Mm-hmm.
So even if you think about it,
that's not really intention,
because it's not really as a possibility,
it's just an extra thought,
that you think,
from the point of view of seated intentions,
body in this posture,
has these things at its disposition.
But then, so what's the duty then?
So I'm watching my mind.
Well, the duty is,
you don't really have to be analyzing,
the domains of your intention,
and what's given,
and what's not. The duty is,
to see that,
whenever the movement is possible,
whenever the movement is occurring,
intention, relation,
it's only because things,
in regard to which you're moving,
are given beforehand.
As a more general thing.
I've seen,
impermanence.
Exactly, thus,
any movement that occurs,
that will occur,
that has occurred,
is within.
It's now seen within,
that inherent impermanence.
Which means,
you do that long enough,
any movement,
no matter how quick,
how fleeting,
or whatever else,
will not be taken as mine.
Why?
Because it's impossible to be taken as mine.
So you dwell on it long enough,
and then it becomes apparent,
that there is no movement
without a still thing
being given beforehand,
for which,
just if I was given beforehand,
you had no say,
in its origin.
You're able to make a choice,
you must have things to choose.
Yeah.
Options, yeah.
Well, yeah.
A nice option.
Option would be more particular,
like proliferation,
but just if I did,
to be able to make a choice,
you have to be able to move,
mentally.
Which means,
in order to move mentally,
the mind needs to be there
beforehand.
So instead of chasing the movement,
you actually use movement,
like as an indication,
of the fact that the mind is still.
Hence, the sign of the mind,
chitta mimita.
And then,
then,
blow me nothing,
I put it's craving thing.
Well, craving,
is possible for as long as
there is sense of eye out.
Then,
I am intending this means,
basically, I am craving this.
But once you start realizing
that it's completely redundant,
and that actually you can be
intending and moving
as a result of, you know,
five aggregates doing just that.
On their own,
not requiring you.
Then you won't.
Yeah.
You won't be needing to crave
anymore in any way.
Yes, well, suppose that the
equation comes up,
means I'm,
if I am not the one intending,
then,
who's going to be responsible
for the choices?
Well, that's the thing,
that I'm going to make.
The question who implies
someone,
and the implication of someone
means, well,
the sense of self is still there.
So, whether you have
that sense of self as
internally or externally,
or both,
it's still there.
So, oh, well,
if it's not me,
who is it?
It means, well,
the general,
then the nature of the
self-view is still there,
because now you're looking
for somebody else.
But if you start seeing
that even that movement,
that looking,
that intending,
that thinking,
is possible because
things are given before,
you just start,
including everything properly.
And if you do long enough,
then it will sort of,
um,
cancel out the things
that were never meant to be there,
in the first place.
You sense of self craving,
you know that,
because now that is required,
it's completely done.
That's what Nihanna
really felt as a parasite,
upon gratuitous parasite,
but completely beginningless.
So, it's no first point
that ignorance is manifest
before which you were
not ignorant,
but actually,
ignorance is not supposed to be there.
It's not required.
Hence, when you know that,
you're not ignorant.
There is no,
no, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no,
no, space in between.
So, are either ignorant
or you're not ignorant?
Knowing that ignorance has no
room removes ignorance.
It's mutually exclusive
video and I will show you,
come.
Knowing that you're seeing
things in the wrong way,
Well, knowing, for example, that you can't own things in the first place, not knowing that makes you own them, through that not knowing.
Hence, a Vigia is responsible for your sense of self, for your appropriation.
Knowing fully and discerning fully that you can't actually own them means Vigia is responsible for your disown and complete removal of appropriation.
And that's the thing, you will know that you can't own them and you see them fully determined always, by that which is a reason beforehand.
You are not saying that, which is a reason, or whatever arises would be determined by this, that has a reason beforehand.
So I can't even conceive to own it.
The only way you can conceive to own it is when you forget that it's determined by that which is a reason beforehand.
And the practices in discerning, and that's the whole particular part is discerning the connection between the two.
And the connection is that connection of dependence, determination, being determined by, being inseparable from Sankara.
Because it's not that there's nothing else in your experience than the five aggregates, by the Patryunal Narahand, whether you've been experienced, you're not.
It's just the five aggregates, one way or the other.
But you want to discern the way they arise.
So within that which you already have, which you've been experiencing, within that you need to start discerning the right things. That's why the correct instruction is absolutely crucial.
Like you can have all the right attention in your life, if there is nobody telling you what you need to attend properly.
How? You simply wonder, you wouldn't know how. Because there is no immediate confirmation whether it's right or wrong.
Only after repeating it for five hundred thousands of times, then the confirmation, ah, okay, yes, I see this. I see the direct connection.
But you would be repeating something, five hundred or thousands of times, they doesn't bear any fruit initially. Only if somebody tells you that you should keep repeating it, they eventually will show it.
So that's why you can't stumble upon them accidentally. You can't accidentally become a sort of honor.
Oh yeah, all the luck. You just told the right thing at the right time. Impossible. You need to think the right thing at the right time for thousands of times. Just repetition, repetition, repetition, repetition until it wears out the ignorance.
When it's worn out sufficiently for you to see over it, imagine again, like a tall tree as you can see anything from whatever.
And then you're just hacking away and hacking away and hacking away. And you still don't see anything because it's tall, she's still.
But when you have hacked away sufficiently, you start to see. And then you know, oh, this hacking is actually working because now I have a degree of confirmation.
And that's all about it. You keep hacking further. Now you know for sure you have it confirmed for yourself that this hacking works in such and such way and you keep doing it and then eventually you'll see nothing.
You see what you need to see.
But if nobody tells you, I mean, you can stop the thing for yourself. If nobody tells you that repeating something away of attending things, away of reflecting.
If that is the right thing and if you don't have faith in what they told you, that's the right thing.
I mean, what are the chances of you yourself doing something right that you don't know that is right and then doing exactly the same thing on and on and on for no apparent reason.
Perhaps you don't know the apparent reason because nobody told you externally, you should be doing nothing.
While everything, your whole experience is directly completely the opposite way.
It's impossible. It's literally impossible. That's why it's impossible for somebody to arrive at the right view just by accident.
So if somebody says, oh, yes, happened. I've done this monitor treat and it happened to me.
You most likely know they don't know what they're talking about because it doesn't happen to you. You develop it.
And if there's something, if something you develop, if there is something that you developed, you will know how you developed.
Thus, Sotapana knows that he knows. He's not just like, oh, yeah, it happened to me. I don't know how I can put it in the words, but it happened.
There's lots of nonsense. There's a spiritual mystical talk.
But if you've done something for thousands of times internally and then you have to confirm for yourself that it works, it's freeing you from suffering directly here and now, then you will know that.
And you will know how to, no matter how not eloquent person you are, you still be able to say at least that it should repeat thousands of times how you've done it.
So that's why the utterance of another is one of the two factors for the right view. The other one is proper attention.
So you go the utterance and then you keep properly attending it on and on and on.
But if you don't have proper attention, you can have all the right utterance of other people all the time.
As you know, sometimes people did. They lived with the Buddha all the time but never became anything because they never properly attended.
Proper attention.
Proper attention is all this where we've been talking about. Proper intention.
But that's another thing. Like, you need to know, or you need to, well, I'm sure you know, but you need to keep in mind that it doesn't happen overnight in a sense.
Oh, I just need to do it once rightly. It happens if you just keep doing it.
Like drilling, training, drilling.
Similarly, the similar of the axe handle in the soup is like a carpenter who uses his axe every day.
He doesn't know. Well, he said basically the wooden axe wouldn't handle. He uses it every day.
And then each time, you know, he grips it, he's wearing it down.
But you can't look at it and say, oh, today I've worn down my handle this much or that much.
Only after, you know, years of using it, one day you're looking, oh, it's really thin.
I've really worn this handle down. And that's how ignorance is being removed.
It's the same sense, same feeling. Like, if you just keep doing it and you keep doing it,
and then there will be a point where, oh, my ignorance diminished.
But you can't say on a daily basis, oh, today diminished this much. Tomorrow it will diminish this much.
You can notice how much you've been attending on a daily basis.
Attending, would you mean? Like, practicing.
Well, you can notice how much effort you've been putting on a daily basis, but you can't have a direct confirmation how much fruit that will bear.
When you do, then you'll be more confident in. Then you'll know, oh, yes. Attending like this has resulted in confirmed confidence now.
And then, obviously, you're your own guide. You know what to do. You know how to do it.
But until then, you just have to keep doing it and trying to make it as right as possible without knowing whether it's right or not.
Because that's the thing. If there is something you need to repeat for thousands of times and then eventually recognize it as right.
Well, you won't know before you repeated thousands of times whether it was right or wrong.
And you will know whether it was right or wrong only if it was right what you've been doing.
Because then you go to criteria whether it was right or wrong.
That's why it's so important to discern the instruction and really understand, try to understand and constantly respond and read the suitors
and talk with people you think they know the suitors, not just like the followers of the day or the day or the day of the ceremony, but really to try to understand.
Trying to understand can lead to understand.
But one thing for sure, you can't understand something accidentally without making an effort.
Yeah, but in able to see these things in the sense, you know, some people you can't be busy person.
No, you need to dedicate your life to it.
You need to dedicate your whole time to it.
You can't, okay, you start contemplating and really getting into that mode and then you know, your phone rings, you have to go, you have to do this, you have to do that person, it's done.
Then the effort will be getting back to the starting point.
Not even starting, it's getting back to the point where you can start.
So no, you can't be busy.
Not even this kind of life, wondering something.
Yeah.
Well, I think wondering would work if you get a right view.
Yes, yeah, okay.
When you know how to already attend things and then you would be attending because there are like, it's physical challenging, it's tiring, it's uncomfortable and everything else.
You get to see it.
And as nice as this forest is, there are lots of things that can bother one in many ways, insects, rain, rock, mud, whatever, whatever.
I don't know.
But none of that would be a reason for you not attending properly, once you know how to attend properly.
If you don't know how to attend properly, then yeah, everything can be a distraction for you, everything in the drug.
So you won't, that's just a far fly, I think, in my face.
Everything, everything can be a distraction for you.
So you really want to minimize that.
Still use the transparency that you have as putugina to know, okay, I'm not just avoiding things, I'm not just going out to them because I'm restless.
Or I'm not just staying in my country because I fear discomfort.
You find a balance of what you think is right, because you don't have a criteria that's right or wrong as putugina.
And then you just have to, okay, do I have time to read the sutras?
Do I have time to meditate, do I have time to contemplate?
Whether I sit and meditate and contemplate, whether I walk, meditate and contemplate, I do have time, okay.
Do I have time, like what other is the environment supporting me, keep the seal, keep the winner, it is.
There are no distractions, there are no unwholesome things happening, that's those criteria as a matter, that's it.
That's more than enough for somebody to be making effort.
But then you know, you can be, oh, do I have enough time? No, I don't.
Am I not being this, well, I'm being disturbed all the time, but people, you know, mingling with laypeople all the time
because after this, after that, well, that's not wholesome.
Well, then you certainly won't be able to expect that you will have enough time to dedicate, like, contemplating the meanings you grasp from the sutras,
like constantly reflecting, constantly drilling, and drilling, and drilling.
Because it's a hard work as it is, you don't need any other.
So, yeah, by all means, before you get the right view, yeah.
Run away from the crowd, leave the world, whatever else.
Then later on, you might see even more, oh, actually, I don't have to go this far from people.
I don't have to run on top of the mountain because I'm fine here.
The mind works well here. I can still be progressing here.
You definitely have to calm down and have a still place.
Until such time, you can be, you can dry enough.
Fair alone, like rhinoceros, the first, the first, the sotapan, the nyanavira quoted.
I've gone beyond the withering of the views that we put in the monument.
Nobody's my own guy. Fair alone, like, yeah.
Once you become your own guy, then fair alone, like rhinoceros.
Not before that.
Because then you'll be fairing like a dumb rhinoceros, pumping into trees and stuff.
Yeah.
Yeah.
