If I was thinking about ordination and certificates of institutions, you never got an ordination based in the human.
It's not something you need. It's not something to practice. You don't need to find the right to practice.
It's an authority to give you the right to mind. It's a certificate.
You could literally, if you were determined in that thinking, well, you could just put on verbs and go and do your thing.
And we'd know whenever I asked you, where you teach. You'd never be reading it in a second.
Well, it wasn't that in the beginning. I mean, mind you, the ordination and the whole thing we go through that did come from the Buddha. It evolved in that way.
So it's a very thing, but I know which means all of the other kind of politics involved with the Sangha in the Western Thailand Nation.
All of the politics that now exist and so on, that all came later.
And that's nothing to do with it. But yes, in the early days, remember when the Buddha was just walking around and saying,
oh, wow, that Dharma seems really true. Can I follow you? And he said, yes, come here. He would address him, and that would mean he is now part of the order.
That's all it took. Because back then, well, it was all about the Dharma, so there was the bond, so to speak. He was clear what the Dharma was.
He was clear what the practice was, so people knew it straight, and there would be enough for them to join and make the effort and become others.
And obviously, in the course of time, over the years, things were getting a bit more complicated. The rules were being made because the monks were breaking, doing all sorts of stuff and so on.
So it evolved to the point, okay, now you need a senior monk, you need a priest, a priest, a priest, a priest, a priest, a priest.
But that's all, again, that's all still relatively simple. But it's also, that's an issue as well, if you think right now, now I'm sort of safe, I am glad to see now.
Well, that's the thing. I was going to say that the reason why it actually evolved, or rather proliferate, that it's not a form of revolving, proliferate more than that, is exactly that, because now, people don't have the Dharma.
They might find it on the individual level, through their individual efforts. But now, when you come to any order, big, telemedicine, whatever, on an average level, what you hear being told, it's nothing to do, it's very little, well, it's not Dharma, basically.
You might be talking about the Dharma, but listening to it, you won't become an around. Even if you make the effort upon it, it's basically wrong.
So, because of that, there is no that kind of clasing of the Dharma, and that's what the Buddha meant when he said, the Dharma will die 500 years after he's passing away.
It doesn't mean it would be impossible to become an around later. It means that, when it's being spoken, when it's being referred to, when it's being quoted, it's most likely going to be wrong.
Now, it's going to refer to the wrong thing as the Dharma, but it won't be the Dharma. Obviously, as I said, a person can dig through that and find it on the individual level, but not on the level of community, society, religion, teachers, whatever else.
So, for that very reason, people, exactly, they need this form of belonging, so they need something more significant to make them feel, well, to feel certain bond with whatever they want to do with his life, so with the whole life, with the older they join it.
Because if somebody just comes off the street and you say, okay, come here, because here is the role. He most likely won't take it seriously, no matter how much he wants to. Why? Because, well, his personal attitude, his personal reasons for practice are not clear to himself.
If, on the other hand, a fully self-transparent authentic person, putugina, comes off the street, there will be enough for him, because he knows the place of it. He knows what he is supposed to do. He knows why he is here for.
So, he won't ever need that external, superficial sense of how belong to something bigger or these robes or whatever else. Sometimes can help to people in the beginning, but it's not really essential, because if they don't start clearing up the bad faith internally, they will never really make the proper effort, which means they will never really discover it down, which means they will never ever be the valid,
the right type of connection with it. It will all be maintained by the external circumstances, such as the robes, the rules, the community, you live in, they will keep you together, not the practice of the wisdom that you develop.
Because, on the other hand, he doesn't have to even be a monk anymore, he doesn't have to wear anything, but he will, because that's the lifestyle that corresponds the best to other hardship, which is why he wouldn't create it in such ways.
It's a, if you were to actually only pick up, for example, monks who are doing clear reasons without bad faith, relatively authentic, you won't find many.
You won't find many, which means that most of the people rely on the external form to keep you together. And that is a form of silabata paramasa, like you don't see the place of the rules.
You think the virtue is the practice, you think keeping your rules together is the dharma, that's what the practice is, but it isn't.
It's a prerequisite, it's something that needs to be in place, but it's not the practice.
So, as I said, I said to you, the problem is the past as well, so you have to find out, how can you not keep the rules without breaking them?
Because breaking the rules, again, that's against the practice, for sure, but then holding the rules is also against the practice. So, how can you not break the rules, but then not keep them either?
That's how you let your silabata paramasa, let's go, rather put it in the right place.
Because you've got big precepts, the basic fundamentals, basic precepts, but everything else, set up a scene, but everything else is unnecessary.
Eight precepts are the kind of core of it, but what I would always refer to, when you would be talking about the olden times, the wise man of the past, you would always be around the eight precepts, there would be the symbol of virtue and morality established that can lead to wisdom if a person makes the right effort.
The rest of it, as he said himself, on his deathbed, it was after the circumstantial, and he said, you can do away with most of the rules, smaller rules that they have made, they are not. They were after the response to a reason problem.
But, obviously, then I'm not going to forget to ask what those rules were, so then the other hand said, well, let's just keep them, because people will, and they would have criticism right away saying, look, the teacher died, and now they're abolished half of the rules, that's it, the order is done.
But maybe the way you said it now, maybe you said it in a similar way, you could actually abolish most of the rules, maybe there was the kind of rules that you could actually, but it wasn't like, which one should be.
Yeah, you're saying, you could, making a point, that's it. Yeah, he could have, actually, yes, I see what you mean, but it's not because the rules were kind of indifferent, they make no difference to the practice of the Dharma, whether you practice it or not, it just makes no difference to it.
Just having them or not, most of those smaller rules we're talking about, having them or not, doesn't make a difference. So, making a big point out of a polishing and really finding out, it's, well, it's a waste of time, and most likely, it might be coming out of something on horse, if somebody's so keen, to get rid of them.
Like in a revolution, I'm going to make a new order or something, it's silly, and it's a waste of time, but yes, in the beginning there were no rules.
Then there was one rule, then there were two rules, then there were three rules, and that's how it evolved. And there is, you know, the famous story of that monk who came and said, oh, I just, I wanted to show, I'm not, see, said, I'm not, I'm not unhappy with the Dharma, not anything on that, but there were way too many rules, and I cannot possibly keep, he said, I can't keep all 147 rules, which was funny because now we have 227.
And this monk was complaining, not all of them were yet created, but he said, it's just too much, like, I can't possibly keep that in my mind, I don't want to do it, and he said, okay, well, can you keep three rules then?
I don't do anything on wholesome by body, by speech or mind, but I think there might be another sort, in this case, he just said, you said, can you just, no, I think I can't imagine, just watch your mind or something like that.
Now this was like, don't do anything on wholesome by body, by speech or by mind, can you do that? Yeah, of course, that's easy, because he knew what unwholesome was, but he couldn't be bothered about the specific, this is how you wear your robe, this is how you put your sitting cloth, you break in the rule, it is ridiculous, in a way.
So that monk had a point, and the Buddha knew that, so he said, well, okay, free enough, some people can see it like that, so can you keep the three rules, and do that?
And that's exactly what refers to, like in the Sutta's Abhidharma, and Abhivina, it refers to that, it's just more, well, more detailed, higher, in a sense, you've surmounted, you've come to the core, the point of every rule is not to do anything on wholesome.
Thus, if you're focused on not doing anything on wholesome, automatically you cannot break the rule, even if actually externally you're putting your sitting cloth wrong, it's not breaking the rule in that way.
So it's breaking the circumstantial irrelevant rule, for which you might be told off, and for which you won't feel anything, because you know it doesn't pertain to anything of significance, which is why you won't have a problem keeping it either.
Making it doesn't make a difference. If some of these people get too wound up, you might want to make a point to them, that is their mistake, but that's more relating to ridiculous co-author stuff that comes with the communities.
But when it comes to rules, it works on that, so you know what's important, and you know there is no compromise there, but then the other rules are just kind of involved in a form of a response to a reason situation for the duration of the Buddha's lifetime.
But technically, and theoretically, you just have to keep the eight reasons, strictly. The stricter you keep then, the sharper you are, the more precise you can get.
And that's it. And like, you know, if sometimes even more or two months, there's this little rule and that little rule. I must not do this, and I can't move the soil, but I can move the soil if it's been disturbed, or it's been at least four weeks before or three months or two months, well the rain is just, it is too complicated, and it's utterly known essential.
So, if on the other hand, you focus on the eight reasons, and you really keep an eye on them, so not even by mind that you're engaging in breaking them, in terms of the unwholesome thought, then even if you go and you take the ground, yeah, externally, it's an offense, and you should confess it, and somebody will tell you off.
But if you know you're breaking that rule, so to speak, you won't do it. You know it's irrelevant, but if you don't do it, there is even no zero ground to be harassed, to be hassled by somebody telling you off, because you shouldn't be doing that.
It's not really relevant, but you do it or not. It makes no difference.
But there is that element of, well other people don't know that, so they would most likely hassle me, and I don't want to be hassled, why would I be hassled? It's just a distraction, having to deal with other people's issues. So then you just don't do it.
So it seems likely that we don't have any hassles, yeah, but I think that's what people choose to be some areas. It doesn't actually, yeah, it doesn't really...
Well, it often actually is, yeah, a few people have met, there have been monks, and there were some areas and the monks and some areas, it was usually revolving around that. It was just, they felt it was too restrictive for no significant reasons.
And you can see the point, because it's not just that it's too restrictive from the knife point of view, but it's too restrictive from the cultural point of view. Call what point of view? Like in Sri Lanka, they might not have so much emphasis on call what as they do in the West or Thailand, but certainly it's there. There are things, oh no, that's not proper.
It's all, it's often relatively random, depending on what Mantel, what Mantel tells you, it's improper or not, but it's still there. How you should be only groomed like that, or what? But it's there.
So, all of that can actually wind people up, and if somebody's serious with a practice, then yeah, it doesn't make a difference when you summon error or pickle. Well, it doesn't make a difference even if you're a layman, but it's much harder in a layman because wearing the robe is also a form of statement for others.
Basically, it implies a lot, it tells others what you are, so you don't have to explain. If you just turn up as a layman in a group of laypeople, they think you're a layman.
You might be, I don't know, I mean your mind, but they think you're a layman, so they'll treat you like that, they'll expose you to lay things, they'll hassle you with lay things and so on.
As a monk, they won't, or if they do, they'll at least know that you're not a layman, but then they might choose to know that, but that's a different thing.
So, it is a form of statement, like by wearing the robe, which was also a time in India, they could have, and they didn't, some would have just worn off, but yeah, they would put on any robes and they would immediately stand up.
There's a sad, he's a religious person, he's the seeker of the spiritual life, they often wouldn't know what kind of seeker, what gun, and then they were, who is your teacher, what what teaching do you follow, they wouldn't have a clue, because you couldn't tell.
They're all racking rags and robes and stuff like that, so it can be anything.
Yes, the thing is like this, as you say now, you subject to other peoples.
Expectations, yeah, yeah, hassle, whatever else.
Yeah, because people stop short when there's a road, and you walk on the corner, you can take the ass off.
And yeah, if you live in an environment where you, it still includes your friends or your family or stuff like that, if you're a layperson, you have to go and hide and talk to the mountain, because otherwise, you know, people would demand things from you, would need things from you.
Yeah, so it's still possible, as it was possible, but as you can be technically an anagami as a layperson, but it's impossible, like it's unbelievably hard.
I mean, it's hard to become an anagami as a monk, let alone as a person, layperson, now they're in the world today.
I'm sure it was hard back in India as well, but I guess their lives were a bit less proliferated than ours, so they were less destruction, less pressure, and so on.
And the mind was also a bit less proliferated, but the point is, where did it go on?
Oh, I would see what's important is authenticity. Oh, that's the...
As it's in, I would say, you know, that's very painful, if you just, it is quite painful, but how do you know it's more painful?
Well, there is no, like a checkpoint that lights up as you pass the level, the sufficient degree of authenticity.
Exactly, like a little beep, letting you know, okay, you're in the clear now, I can take your mom's call.
No, it's not like that.
You know it by various things, and I think it varies from, like, different people would recognize it in a car of different things, but first of all, it's very unpleasant.
So authenticity in itself will not lead you to peace, or becoming authentic, what it does removes all of the unwholesome ways that you have built up in a course of your life to manage or to obscure the fact that your suffering, that existence is unpleasant, that existence is not yours, that it's dreadful, that it's terrifying.
So you use acts of bad faith to cover that up, and then, you know, you can feel it is, you can feel confident, whatever else, whatever habits you have built.
Well, authenticity undoes all of that, so it really exposes you back to just pure, well, often dread, like anxiety, because your entire being is a whole, everything, your sense of self.
You start to feel it is just completely exposed to anything, and you have no control over it yet, you don't know how to stop holding it.
So it's quite a dreadful situation, and that's what authenticity does.
So it's like all of the, the extension philosophy that did talk about it, preach it, practice it himself, could not quite sustain it.
Kierke get up and, you know, he was pellet on his deathbed, he said, he never had a moment piece, moment of peace in his life.
From the moment he decided he'd become a philosopher, but he mended in the right, and not kind of theoretical, pondering hegaly and type, but more like genuinely living what he is thinking, what he is preaching.
So he was considered one of the first existentialists for those reasons, so he really made an attitude out of it.
He broke off his engagement, left the woman that he was really in love with, didn't want to accept the position in some, because they were just made him like, well, it would kind of settle him, and it would provide him an illusion of existential safety, which he knew was not right.
Although, every answer he's being wanted to accept it, because everybody gives in to the office of safety, that's how it works.
But he refused, but obviously he was protrusion, so he didn't know the way out.
So he would refuse to give in, which means basically that for the rest of his life he was on the well, on a verge of a breakdown constantly, with facing the existential anxiety and anything else, yet not giving in.
If he would be writing like two or three 500 pages book, 500 pages books per year publishing, you just look at publishing 14, 15, six every year, massive volumes of work, because he was just so intense, and Nietzsche as well, I mean, Nietzsche lost it in the end, he kind of pushed it so far, refused to give in, and went mad as a result of it.
And actually the Buddha did say that, if a person correctly, genuinely authentically starts experiencing suffering, recognizes the nature of suffering, the two outcomes.
Noble search, or mental derangement.
So Nietzsche, by refusing the Christian God, my mad, because he really left no footing for him. Kierkegaard refused to let go of the idea of the eternal God and savior, which made him really funny.
You read this really cute existential description, and then just switches into this God preaching with completely discrepanced stuff, contradictory. So he refused, and that's what actually I think kept him sane, because without having that little bad faith, he would have fully exposed himself to the nature of suffering.
And without the Buddha's help, you cannot, you, you go mad, or you immediately, you know, coming to the Dharma if you've known the research thing.
So that's what authenticity does for you.
But it's just inconceivable to succeed in any way in the Dharma without that as a starting point, because for as long as you're entertaining and holding on to the views and beliefs,
that you have built up as a result of covering up the nature of resistance in a course of your lifetime, you cannot possibly then start applying right view and right things onto it, because you're holding on to the wrong things and wrong views as a form of safety.
And that's why, like, you know, people can, many, people, many monks can know for a fact, openly, they're not even a sort of one, they don't know escape from suffering. Yet, which means they refuse to let go of things that are keeping them put together, but at the same time offering them sense of safety, yet at the same time, they can believe that they are practicing the Dharma, and they're able to teach and preach about it.
So it's after contradiction. If you don't know the way yourself, you can't teach the way yourself. And you don't know the way yourself, because you're refusing to let go of the wrong ways that you have accumulated as a form of, as a form like a buffer zone, as a protection.
So the first thing you will notice by practicing, by becoming authentic, is complete disovenment, so to speak, of your confidence.
The confidence that you've built as a lay person is just completely disobeyed in regard to everything. You feel after exposed in every way.
But then, gradually, if you again don't go mad, don't do anything stupid, don't give up, then the right view can emerge from that, because you're not obstructing it by any holding that is there to delude you to cover things up.
You're not doing that, you're refusing to engage in an act of ignoring, thus a VJ is not being maintained.
So you still don't know that, but that's how your experience is being set up.
So then, by thinking about down a practicing, then you actually start to recognize things that you were talking about, because that is what a VJ is. It's not a metaphysical veil of delusion, Maya, or whatever else, depending on the religion.
It's not something that is, to be found, to be discovered in an instant, you turn astonished right there, finally you found it, you was hidden. No, it's the very act.
It's the very act of your mind, day in day out, bad faith, ignoring, actively not looking at certain things, actively not acknowledging those things.
Technically speaking, anybody is even vaguely familiar with the sutras, has a vague idea of the Dhamma. If he was to start practicing with intensity, he would naturally go in that direction.
And then even that vague instruction that he came across might be quite sufficient. The more authentic you are, less instruction you need.
The more authentic you are, you understand more. Whatever comes up doesn't, if it's inauthentic, it doesn't stand up for too long.
Well, it doesn't maintain itself. Exactly. As the sutras say, the aggregates, the fire aggregates are being taken up by your assumption, by Upadana, in the same way the fire takes up the fuel.
So the fire burns the fuel, takes this up to be the fuel, and the fuel maintains the fire in return. So the fire, through burning the fuel, spreads over that fuel and keeps burning.
So in the same sense, Upadana and assumption, through maintaining, through engaging in it, it's maintaining itself in regard to your experience as a whole, which is what the fire aggregates are.
So authentic person might be a pitugina, he doesn't know the dhamma, but if he recognizes the validity, the wholesomeness of being authentic, and he starts doing it, he doesn't know yet.
But what he's doing, he's not actually engaging anymore in ignoring, so he's not maintaining hisavidja, he's not maintaining his Upadana, he's not maintaining his craving.
He's exposing it all, and not engaging in it, he can't compress it, like admitting or think, knowing that they are doing something which is based on lust, based on anger.
Yeah, I know it, I'm saying, yeah, that's creating, that's creating. Well, no, you can't. Well, I mean, they can, but that's not authentic, that's the thing.
They're authentic initially on the level of recognition, but they're not authentic on the level of engaging physically in those unwholesome acts, or mentally.
Because, like, as I said, the fact you recognize this is unwholesome, but then you choose to give in, thus you abandon your authenticity right there, and then thinking your authentic while you're engaging in inauthentic acts is a contradiction in terms which means you're inauthentic, which means when you think of yourself as authentic, you're not, because you just gave in.
But, yes, as I said, person can undo a lot of unwholesome things, which are things that maintain, of Asia, maintain craving, perpetuate craving, and so on, even without knowing their nature.
And then, when they do come across the sutras and the dhamma, they need very little instruction, because they've already set everything up correctly, and that's like the famous story of Bahia.
He was just doing things on his own, wearing the tree bark as he drove him, he thought he was another hunter, and stuff.
And when he met the Buddha, he just gave him a line of instruction, in scene there will be only scene in her, and he was another hunter right there, and then, and be, wow, wow, that was a powerful instruction.
Well, the only reason why that instruction worked is because, although he was wearing a tree bark and doing his own thing, he was actually doing it pretty much rightly.
He was authentic to the point of he just needed the one sentence from the Buddha to just slightly tweak whatever understanding he had, and that's it.
And that's what the Buddha meant when he said, some people have little dust in their eyes.
You know, his previous teachers, upon his arrangement, he wanted to go, okay, who should I teach first, then? I said, well, I'll teach my previous teacher with very little, he reached the base of neither perception or perception. So he has very little dust in his eyes, just giving him a sentence or two, and there will be enough for his full enlightenment.
Why? Because actually, reaching the state of neither perception or perception in your contemplation, your understanding, your establishment of mind is quite tall older, and if you can do that, as I said, even a sentence from the Sutras will be more than sufficient for our hunter.
So, if you keep that in your mind in regard to any experience, you go through it and be physical.
So, if you keep that in your mind in regard to any experience, you go through it, be physical or mental, you will, your mind will eventually, well, start experiencing this enchantment with those things, because you just always see them permanence.
Obviously, without the external instruction, without the external pointer of the Sutras, you can't direct that to your self-view, but you can undo pretty much everything else, so when it comes down to undoing your self-view, it won't be that hard.
Self-view is maintained through all of the other wrong views, and it's maintained through the wrong view of itself.
So, you can't abandon self-view, and still hold other views. So, abandoning self-view means you technically undermine all of the other wrong views.
You might still be engaging in sensuality and so on unless you're an Anugami, but the nature of it has been seen, so you just need to develop your mind to the extent necessary that that nature of sensuality doesn't pull you anywhere.
It will show that you can be even an Anugami. It's not that authentic, it's not completely authentic.
Not completely. The 100% authentic person is are out.
It means there is no trace of a visual act in any shape or form or degree, but exactly. So, upon Anugami and Anugami, they all have corresponding degrees of perfect.
So, they're still not quite looking at certain things. They lack certain things.
In an authentic book, you want to think of the ultimate authentic view of what it's seen through this.
You know, around here, but the way it's seen will be seen in a situation as a whole. It's seen when doing a self-image.
Well, yeah, basically it's seen. Knowing your motive, well, first of all, keeping the precess.
So, not doing anything unwholesome by body, by speech or by mind, in that sense. And then especially, you start by not doing anything unwholesome by body because, no matter how hard you think,
oh, yeah, I'm being authentic, you're not. Because the domain of a physical action is undermining you. You're not restraining it.
It just simply needs to be restrained, full-stop. Yes, but no, but no, it needs to be restrained. And then afterwards, it becomes apparent why.
That's why Cila comes first. It's not negotiable. So there will be the first step. But once the Cila is in place, then you would start becoming more aware, more mindful of your intentions, of your motivation, why to do this, why to do that.
And that's exactly how you distinguish whether it's wholesome or it's unwholesome. If you were about to do something, why am I about to do it? Why do I want to do it? What's my motivation behind it?
As I spoke before, sometimes what's externally, what externally appears as wholesome and great and approved by everybody else, actually can be done for unwholesome reasons.
So that doesn't mean, for example, that the relatively common story of making merit, what people do, because they want something in return, they want the better life for the future.
Yeah, ideally, you don't want to want anything, you just want to give. But if you still do want, that doesn't mean you should stop making merit, because it still counts. But the point is, and also, if you catch yourself wanting a better rebirth, and that's why you give merit, and then you stop giving merit altogether.
Well, that's like overshooting the monk as well, that's wrong too. So what you want to do is be aware of your motivation, and then changing.
You can't stop thinking, so you just have to fully acknowledge the fact that there is a desire for a better rebirth in the future. And by fully acknowledging it, but being fully mindful of it, you'll end up, well, you'll stop acting out of it, because only when you're not mindful of things, do that in the background, as a more general intention that's motivating you, then you'll be in control of it.
You know, when people sometimes, they kind of know why they're doing something, but they refuse to acknowledge to themselves, and then somebody points it out, and it kind of stops them in the shoes.
Yeah, it's obvious.
And you know, that's an actor by faith, and that's what you don't want to entertain. So you always keep reviewing your mind as to why am I doing this, why am I doing that, why am I saying this, why don't you want to do this, why am I about to say that?
And if you see something on wholesome, it doesn't mean, okay, I'll stop doing everything now, because that's another act.
Now you're doing out of fear of unwholesome, but acting out of fear is also unwholesome.
So you end up revolving around, you know, panic or whatever else, confusion, doubt, which is all unwholesome.
So you actually, no, you stop and review it. Okay, I want to make merit because I want to be reborn in heaven. Make merit counts.
You just reflect upon the entire situation. Make merit counts, no matter what I want or not.
Obviously, that merit will be greater if I don't act out of two selfish reasons.
So then you still value basically, you still recognize that the act of making merit is valid, whether yourself you should not.
So you don't deny it entirely. But then what you try to do is while making merit or whatever else, just focus on different aspects, because there are other intentions present.
Like here, you want the primary intention is you want to be reborn in heaven, but also you want to help.
Or whatever you give it. Or simply you know that, well, okay, I can't stop wishing to be reborn in heaven.
But what I can do is reflect on the nature of the heaven, and also see that that's something in permanent that will not last forever.
Thus you experience this enchantment in regard to that which you cannot stop wishing for.
And automatically, exactly the pool of your desire towards it stops. It's still a fact that if you give, you will be reborn in heaven eventually as a result of the greatness of your gifts.
So it was nothing to do with you from the beginning. It was just aspects you were focusing on and you're craving taking over.
But if you reflect that even that is in permanent, you stop craving it. You might still want it in a sense. It's factual. It will happen as one of the outcomes.
And that's absolutely fine.
So that's the problem with people when they kind of experience, well, it feels like action paralysis.
When you get caught up, like, oh, you see you're about to do something on wholesome or something that comes from the unawesome reason, but it's not necessarily an awesome, but then you just stop doing everything.
You just shut it down, shut it down, nothing, nothing, I'm saying no to everything.
You can't possibly sustain it because as I said, that's an act that comes out of death and also.
So you actually have to be able to allow it to rise and then recognize where it comes from and then affect that, not just throw the baby with the water and everything else.
And that's how you uproot the desire as well, any desire for that matter. When you desire something, well, then you reflect on what you desire on the final goal, the final outcome of that desire.
You reflect on that long enough as impermanent as something that inherently cannot provide satisfaction and automatically your desire fades. But if you directly start to try to tackle your desire, I'm not wishing it, you just end up winding yourself up.
More and more, like a dog running title, post running around it and just making the least shorter and shorter.
It's a suit of ones that are dear, ones that are dear, you know, king, percent of the other ones, okay.
And what I just said in terms of the desire and what you're just saying in terms of impermanent, yeah, that's basically, that's the difference.
Between thinking the world is the problem and recognizing that actually the problem is your attitude of craving.
Because by default, you don't see your craving, you immediately project, you think the world is a problem. So, ah, the dear ones are caused for suffering. My family is caused for my pain. Friends are caused for suffering.
Attachment is a cause of pain, deny, deny, deny. I will run away, I will abandon everybody, I will not talk to anybody ever again because attachment is a suffering.
But you project it onto the world and you think that by running away, you will abandon the attachment, but you won't, because attachment is actually your attitude.
So, if you stay in the world, or relatively stay in the world, not run away or whatever else, or project out there, then exactly.
But reflecting upon the impermanence, upon the like inherent dissolution of it eventually, you will experience this enchantment and that's the abandoning of attachment, not running away.
That's why, you know, you can have arahants living in the middle of a village. That's why the Buddha didn't. He said, well, let the monks who want to live in caves, let those who want to live in the cities, live in the cities.
For as long as it brings them arahansi, or the famous sutra, they are often actually called the bait, the simile of the bait, when people unwarily eat the food and mara lays out for them, the deer herd.
And then the mara does whatever he wants, and then other people see that, other herd sees that, and then they shun the bait completely, run off in the mountain, say no to everything, but they can't sustain that.
So then they come back, and then they have no choice but to eat them early, and then again mara takes control of them.
And then the third deer herd is the one that sees these bones, well, what if we stay in the domain of the bait, but eat it carefully, and then mara can see them.
They're right there, but they're not catching onto the bait, because you can see only those who grab the bait.
So you're right in the mara's domain, but you can't see them, and that's often in the sutras, and what they said.
The evil one, the unwarily one, can't see me. I'm invisible to them.
Next, to see Ned, because I read that the verse this is, he's telling the woman to reflect, the woman is telling the queen to be fed, she lost her son.
And he came without her permission. What is it to look for? He came from somewhere, you live in another way, without permission.
Right, she will see. Yeah, yeah.
Because having a family, when you see that, will you come to maintain a future family?
Well, it becomes actually pointless. You can keep the civil relationship normalised, but internally.
And again, it's different than just saying no, and refusing to have contact with them, and things like that.
Well, that means you're still attached to it, now you're just denying the whole thing, because you can't feel yourself from it. So like that unaware group of that they heard, that saw people being controlled on account of the bait, then they shunned the bait, and they ran away from it.
But then they came back, because they had no choice.
So that's the thing, if you internally experience this enchantment in regard to it externally, you can be very much in the middle of it.
Obviously, there are things that externally you cannot do, like you cannot break the eight reasons.
So just like intentionally, and are out, you cannot intentionally kill, intentionally engage in sexual intercourse, intentionally steal, or lie, or things like that, you can't do that.
So the certain are wholesome things, and external manifestations of them are entirely gone.
But everything else, like, which is why, often, Iran's are not being recognised externally by others, including other Iran's sometimes.
Yeah, see that, this is the dumbest one, who is the first person coming from Iran.
Because I want to be known, because I want this person, she's to be known, basically.
Well, that's fundamentally speaking, but where he wants it or not, makes no difference.
But once you experience this enchantment, you won't have a problem talking about it, because it's not, it's easy to be talking about myself.
So externally, again, people can think, oh, he's following himself. Like the first thing the Buddha said upon his enlightenment, when he was walking on the road, when that man met him and says, oh, your senses are clear and bright, you look peaceful.
Who's teaching, did you follow, to reach that peace and clarity? And the Buddha said, I don't follow any of these things, I'm my only, I'm my own teacher, I've enlightened myself, I'm the greatest in the world. And this man says, bright, so be it, friend, and walks off.
He thought, like, good, go, he's just following himself. And I'm not going to talk to him and left him.
And the Buddha was not wrong in saying, anyway, because he is the greatest in the world. But again, if you say that to Pathujana, to somebody who's not free from the self-view, they cannot possibly not take it in a conceited sense.
Which is why the universe, when sister was gearing the letters, only later realized the true meaning of Anatimani, non-conceit, because she thought Nyanavira was following himself and she really had a go at him, trying to really challenging. But when she failed and then come to see the reason, together with you, then she realized, no, actually it was truly humble.
But again, you read that externally, you couldn't tell if you wouldn't know, if you wouldn't yourself have a reference point for what the real humility means.
You know, the other sort of when the Buddha, when the woman was, we spoke about the other day, when she was saying to Nanda, how come my uncle and my father were older, they were the same, they were even in different heavens and so on. And the Buddha said, because the different faculties, and then he goes on saying, sometimes a person can externally be pleasing to everybody, to monks, to lay people, just the greatest person.
They're humblers, the meekers and everything, but he holds onto the wrong views.
Which means basically externally, whatever he is, it's utterly relevant, because the wrong views will take him down, not bringing to the better rebirth in the future.
And then constantly, like opposite of that, your person who is prone to anger, prone to being irritated, prone to last protoversion, externally, you know, people think he's a bit of a prick.
But he has right views, he did develop right views, and because of that he will go out afterwards.
He is far from ideal, but he's still, so the external is not the measure, he can be an indicator, but it's far from being a measure.
So that's why, the fewness of the wishes and so on, that's an internal attitude.
But depending on the person's faculties, how bringing, and you know, depending on previous lives and habits, they've been called, like neutral habits that have been cultivated for so long, they might be speaking like a really, really arrogant, whatever.
I know it all, I'm fooling myself, although they might be an aren't, or in a way to become one.
And that's where putujana's authenticity comes in. Like, you shouldn't.
But you know, it's how you should not criticize anything, you should accept everything.
Like, every view you should accept, every view is the right view, that's nonsense, it doesn't work right there.
So you do need to distinguish between right and wrong. But if you're authentic, you'll know, okay, this makes more sense, or this doesn't make so much sense.
So you don't fully dismiss, nor do you fully commit in a sense, you don't forget that you're still a putujana.
So you follow the one that makes more sense, and you keep reflecting upon it and re-evaluating it.
But because you clearly keep in your mind that you're still a putujana, you never fully sharp the door to things being different.
So if sometimes down the line, you now find out that this view was utterly wrong.
You won't have a problem dropping it in an instant and finding a better one, the one that makes more sense.
If you re-authentic though, you will have a big problem out of it, which is why you get 40-50 vast agents.
And if their view gets challenged, it's just the entire existence is being kind of trembling.
Why? Because they shut the doors very early and went down the wrong lane too far to be able to come back.
So it's not optional anymore. And that's what you don't want to happen to you, or to anybody else.
So you have to keep being authentic and then exactly that.
And then when you think you're right, well, test it.
As I told you before, when I started reading philosophy and downwind the suitors,
being in nothingness made quite a big impact on me, it's option.
It was quite insightful and, well, a revelation. I read it, I think, six or seven times.
Then I found in the video, starting in the video that made it even more sense,
because it was like an existential philosophy attitude about the suitors.
It was exactly like, oh, the missing link and so on. So I was really going into that.
And then, finally on the video, a lot of the influence by Sartre and his writing,
and even his way of writing was similar, which was great for me, because I was already very familiar with it.
But then he kept saying, well, it's like, in reference to this or that, how Sartre is wrong.
He or Sartre is wrong there. And I couldn't see it.
I couldn't see how Sartre is wrong. So for me, I could have deluded myself and said,
well, in the video there's no one. Because I saw what Sartre meant, and I thought that was right.
But now in the video says what Sartre meant here is wrong.
And I could have deluded myself and said, well, in the video there's no one.
He's talking about his following self. If I was too afraid to abandon my views, but I wasn't.
So then I kept reading in the video, but then I was becoming afraid to read being in nothingness
or to find any reference or Sartre, because in my mind, I felt like I'm gaining understanding
of what Nyanavira is saying. But then if I were to go back and read Sartre's work,
and if I would still feel him right, that would be a contradiction in terms.
Because I can't have both Nyanavira right and Sartre right, because Nyanavira said Sartre is wrong.
So if I fully understand both, I'll see how Nyanavira is right and I'll see how Sartre was wrong.
And lots of people are actually afraid to do that.
They're afraid to undermine their own views, which means they're afraid to upgrade them.
Because upgrade is a formula change, and they're afraid to do that.
So for a while, I was afraid, but I kept going with Nyanavira.
But I couldn't, you know, I wouldn't open anything with Sartre.
I had to hold 12 stack collection, my mother brought me from Serbia, that I bought ages ago, all of his works.
And then I remember once I was like, well, you know, there's no postponing.
I really have to see where I'm at, and I opened the Transcendence of Ego.
He's kind of short of work, which I remember.
He was so, like, quite a revelation for me to read the whole thing.
So like, wow, I curated it out.
And I was afraid I won't see his wrong views there.
Fortunately enough, like, first second paragraph, it became, oh, of course, yeah.
Which means, yeah, I did actually understand Nyanavira at that point sufficiently enough to see how Sartre was wrong.
Which was clearly a measure of progress for me.
So then I just kept going.
And that also means that you cease to be afraid from any challenge of any other view.
So then I would go to a library and pick up.
Well, I would pick up knowingly stuff that are wrong views.
Like all the nonsense they have in the West, in the libraries.
All the new age books and then, you know, the asset had gurus from India or whatever else.
I wouldn't bother with that because there's two plainly wrong.
But then the stuff that was kind of borderline, I would get that and read it and try to see,
not just all this is wrong, because I don't like him and I know what he got up to or whatever else.
No. I had to read the views. I had to understand the views.
And I had to see how and where they were wrong.
And I had the similar thing when I was reading some in a polysuita,
the fruits of the ascetic life in Indian and Kaya.
When the Buddha lists the six main kind of basis or the wrong view.
When people think there's nobody killed and you can go and just chop everybody's head off
along the east side of Genji and this side of Genji's.
Nobody ever dies for just elements.
First time I read that, to me felt every of those views felt right.
Because yeah, there is no self, there is no good in reality.
There is, I was a layman back then, 18, 19 years old.
Yeah, but then as I read it, I thought the Buddha is just listing these great views.
But then he says, all these views are wrong.
Oh my goodness, I just stole their all right.
I don't see how they are wrong.
But again, I could have just turned a blind eye to it or I could have made the effort
and see exactly why they are wrong, which is what I've done.
And that's exactly what he talks.
You should interrogate, investigate, re-evaluate.
That's what the practice is.
Not like sitting and staring at the floor or nodding your head down
and watching your breath until you fall asleep.
No, he's like full on active.
And even if you are into samadhi, if you are a samadhi type,
when people often used to disregard not making, like,
to justify not making the effort to understand the sutra,
oh, I'm a samadhi type.
Now, only if you're an arahant, you can say whether you're a samadhi type
or repassana type, not before that.
So even if you go to sit and meditate,
you should be developing the right views,
not like not doing anything.
And that's what the practice is.
That constant drilling, uprooting, abandoning, upgrading,
whatever else.
Whatever it takes until you're very knowledge,
not a chance, not a circumstance,
nothing given externally to you that can be taken
until something that you fully developed
and you fully understood by yourself is the result,
is the cause of you being free from suffering,
and free from possibility to suffer ever again in the future.
That's what the practice is and that's where it should end.
That's where it should lead to.
Yes, you need to read the sutras.
That's when you knew it was such an important book
because it was that necessary starting point
just telling you how to start.
I often say to people, well, even if you don't get anything
more from cleaning the path,
at least if you get the attitude that you should have
towards the sutras, that's a good starting point.
Because as I said, yeah, you can have people
completely disregarding certain parts of the sutras
they're controlling their views yet to the same time
they're practicing the sutras, they're practicing the done.
It doesn't work like that.
If you were to understand something from the sutras,
you'd be at least a sort of partner.
Thus, if you're not a sort of partner,
there is no understanding.
There's no gray area there.
And it's just such an obvious thing,
but even I needed to hear it from your navela.
It just doesn't occur to you,
especially because all the contemporary stuff
that's out there, that it's telling you otherwise.
But I'm not even, because they're able to keep saying that.
Like when we saw the partner,
and I think, and then you look at the sutras and you do this,
yeah, it says that,
but you just never pay attention to it.
Are many occasions?
There's been a huge loss of attention to the sutras.
Yeah.
Something stand out more than that.
Well, that's become apparent to me in the early days.
There's not lots of walking meditation and contemplating things.
And I realize, well, hold on.
I am contemplating the navela.
But what makes me think that the tools that are used for contemplation,
the basic concepts that are used for contemplation,
what makes me think that that's right?
How do I know that?
You just assume that the tools they were given to you were right,
and then you just start working with them.
But hold on.
What if they're not right?
It means the outcome that you make with those tools will never be right either.
And the tools I'm referring to are these basic concepts,
such as consciousness, perception, feeling, intentionality.
And it became apparent to me that, well, hold on.
You'll get Phoenicians.
Exactly.
What I, in 2017 years,
what I have developed,
what I've kind of gathered,
consciousness to mean,
well, how do I put to you now?
Which means, my understanding of what consciousness is,
is put to you, which means there is no understanding.
And there was in the early days,
and I realized that, okay, so actually it's not about finding.
It's just undoing stuff that you already have.
Because what you have, you got it wrongly.
So then I switched and started doing my walk-in meditation.
I was in the heart, I'm in a little room.
There were four or five steps, one way or the other way, one way diagonally.
From wall to wall, but it was enough to keep me going.
And I kept doing it there,
and then I just, I would literally just take up,
I was still on the garlic.
Take up consciousness.
And just keep thinking what consciousness is.
And I don't mean referring to, you know,
some literature, psychological descriptions,
nonsense, whatever else.
But just generally, okay,
I say consciousness out loud right now.
What does that stand for right now in my experience?
It needs to stand for something.
Otherwise, you couldn't be able to say it.
So you can do that in regard to everything.
But you want to bring it down to the most general,
most fundamental terms,
the five aggregates,
matter, feeling, perception,
tensionality, and consciousness.
So then you start thinking like that,
and you realize it's not about building things,
not even bothering with the tool,
just undoing that which I thought of tools,
because all of that was taken for granted.
And that was already the problem.
So you undo that, that's all you have to do.
It's not that you have to undo the wrong tools
and then build the right thing.
No, I'm doing that means building the right thing.
