It seems to be, at all, it's a nice practice, it's somewhat easier.
It's not so confusing, just watching the state of your mind.
And then just being honest, this is suffering.
You know, because it's these developments or something.
This is what it needs to suffer.
When I follow this development through, where is it going?
It's sort of, by seeing the state of your mind, you don't lose the perspective.
Where does this go?
When you don't see the state of your mind, why do you go with it?
Even if you know it might end up most likely.
Well, certainly.
And in pain and displeasure and disappointment or whatever.
You kind of go ahead with it because you haven't maintained the perspective
through seeing that if you're a general state of mind, there was directing you there.
Not that particular thing.
So, yeah, it is relatively easy.
If a person is honest.
But it's like, you know, different people can find different things easier in terms of practice.
The point is that it's not, I think, as we spoke yesterday.
It's not just, well, just watch your mind.
It doesn't really make sense.
Well, it makes sense, but it's just so general that it doesn't really make a difference.
I watch your mind, well, what can you mind?
But that's the way we spoke yesterday.
These are watching the state of your mind, means watching the background of your mind,
which is what Chita is really.
It's that peripheral, the general, like mood, cloud, whatever we call it in the past,
that kind of just like a general sort of leaning towards certain directions.
So, yeah, that's how you can see the mind in terms of the five aggregates.
Again, as you spoke, it's the most obvious environment.
So, like, I might not have any particular sensual design right here, right now in front of me,
exciting or disturbing me, but the background of my mind is sort of affected by that.
There's like a cloud of sensuality, big heavy in the background.
Nothing particular manifested, but it's there kind of directing me.
And if people are not mindful of that, they'll end up then particularizing
that very, like, general cloud of sensuality or ill will, like,
data is feeling the bad mood, so they take it out on somebody eventually.
They're very angry, strained.
If they're a bit more restrained, they won't take it on anybody else,
but they've just been ill will, like, mood internally.
But it's all coming from the general kind of peripheral sort of background
of your particular experience.
And that's where the mind is. That's where you never...
So, just watch your mind, usually people are just looking at what's right in front of them,
which means they directly don't see what their mind is, because the mind is not there in front,
the mind is the background of that.
So, the moods, all of those are kind of a manifestation of that mind.
But if somebody keeps an eye on the general sort of cloud of one's mind,
that ambiguous sort of pressure, that it's sometimes pleasant,
something related, sometimes depressed, sometimes, all of those are, like,
phenomena in the same sense as you have things arising in front of your eyes,
arising on their own, ceasing, persisting.
In the same sense, the internal phenomenon of your general mind,
that ambiguous one, arises in the same manner.
So, you have a nest for the latest mind.
It's just that always like that.
And now it's present and it's enduring.
It's persisting like that.
And while it's persisting in the state of a relation,
if you're mindful of it, you won't be taken by that.
If you don't discern that phenomenon of that mind for what it is,
you will be taken, then you'll be later.
Like, inexplicably, inexplicably, but you'll be all over the place,
because you're in a great mood.
Everything is good.
All the nothing has changed, really.
It was just your mind.
But because you have no insight or other,
you have no capacity but to not take it as yours.
You have to take it as yours, because you don't have anything else.
Then you are related.
Then you're all affected.
Then everybody's in the same sense.
When they're mind, the acceleration ceases.
And then another state.
Another mind arises, a mind of ill will,
or a mind of depression, or a mind of something,
then you're completely taken by that.
So, basically, you're completely liable to like the swings
and the swings of that mind, the wider of your mind.
As if the rain comes, you will completely drench.
The sun comes, you're the best in the, you know,
you're the greatest in the head.
You have absolutely no shelter from it,
because you're just taken by it.
But if you start seeing it,
as an equal phenomenon that arises in its own domain of that generality,
so it never becomes particular.
The mood always stays in the background.
When it's related, you know it is related.
When it's depressed, you know it is depressed.
And that's actually enough to not be taken by it.
There's like the practice of Saty Patan.
He knows his mind is expanded.
He knows his mind is drunk.
He knows his mind is elated.
He knows his mind is depressed.
If he's depressed, he knows it is depressed.
So, it's not, I've been depressed.
The presence of a depressed mind is there.
That's it.
Then the presence of a different elated mind is there afterwards.
So, it's basically, and it's not,
and also that's another assumption,
to assume that it's the same mind.
That it's being depressed.
Because all you're going to have is a state of your mind.
Your experience will always reveal your mind through a state.
And those states are different.
Which means, those minds are minds.
Prodo.
Not at the same time,
but basically,
presence of one mind in that the utmost general level
means such and such mind is there.
And then another presence of a different mind opposite
that means such and such mind is there.
And that's all you can truly know.
You assume that it's the same mind yet induced those states.
But when you see that there is no mind being discerned
without those states given beforehand,
you realize,
oh, the mind is inseparable from those states.
Thus, the mind cannot be on its own independent of them.
And it's the same sense with the feelings.
When the Buddha said,
do you take feelings to be yours?
Like, yes.
It's like, well, which one do you take then to be yours?
Because there is pleasant feelings.
There is some pleasant,
there is neither pleasant,
there are completely different feelings.
Separate, different feelings.
So there's no one feeling that then gets kind of
turning to the colors of pleasure and colors of this pleasure.
No, it's a different feeling, entirely different feeling.
And they don't mix, they don't like connect,
they don't mold into each other.
So if you have three different feelings,
which one is yours then?
If you have like,
millions of manifestations of your mind,
which one is yours?
None.
None can be yours.
But you can see that in general your mind is taken by a longing of yours.
Yeah.
Generally, well, I should say.
Not taken by longing,
because that implies your mind sits there.
But you can see that the mind, which is a general,
is a longing mind.
It's the depressed mind.
It's the happy mind.
It's the evil mind.
It's the economist mind.
It's this mind.
It's that mind.
The mind is there.
And if you see there's dependent,
or rather as inseparable from the state it has a reason,
what you see as it coming from over there,
not from over here, I mean.
So you are just sort of mindful of it.
You're just arises, ceases,
and persists why it changes.
As any other phenomenon does.
It shows exactly the same nature.
But on that general level.
You have to abandon those things.
When I say abandon,
if you know that this longing,
you have a longing mind.
Well, you abandon longing.
Well, see.
You abandon longing show,
but you don't abandon longing
by interfering with the longing mind,
because there wasn't yours to begin with.
So you can abandon you appropriating the longing,
the mind that longs,
the mind that's sad,
the mind that's happy.
You abandon that.
You abandon the appropriation of that.
And that's a very different thing.
But if you say, oh, yes,
you abandon the longing mind.
If you abandon the longing mind,
it means like, oh,
you must remove the longing from your mind.
Yeah.
And that doesn't work.
It's basically,
the mind is that longing.
So removing longing from your mind
means you still assume that the mind is separate
from that longing,
and then this longing just infected it,
and then you clear it out,
and then the pure mind stays.
So the pure mind is mind that's left alone.
The pure mind is the mind.
It's thinking.
Involved.
Well, you basically discern
the impossibility of your involvement
in the first place,
which is how you stop being involved.
What about seeing your position in regard to the mind?
Your position.
Meaning,
you see a mind that's the background.
Uh-huh.
And then everything else,
which is more particularly on that.
So you see,
you're not the background.
Well, it would allow,
like a citizen stepping away,
from the background of the mind.
So yeah, yeah, it could help.
Because usually people by not seeing that,
they're taken by that background,
kind of magnetic cloud,
it sort of directs them
towards either real will,
or sensuality,
or whatever engines there are,
or as all,
through like a latent supermoon,
happy, happy joyful,
whatever.
But it's basically completely dependent
on an utterly randomly,
circumstantially,
that is a manifested mind.
So that's how you,
you can basically be mindful
through other daily,
regardless of where you are,
what you do,
well, not completely what you do.
You have to practice restraint, obviously.
But I mean, like,
whatever you're doing,
then it's not clearly unwholesome.
Uh-huh.
Just by keeping that peripheral eye
on the general state of your mind
for what it is,
you already, basically,
you're already fortified against that,
that like, uh,
pressure,
that that mind will exert
on you to do particular things.
So the mind,
that like a general cloud
of like sensual craving,
if you're not,
if you're not seeing it,
for what it is,
as a phenomena,
it will eventually pressure
me to particularizing
that very craving,
through either, you know,
engaging through any sensuality
that you can get at a time
wherever you were,
a big full music entertainment,
whatever,
things like that.
You would end up going towards that,
because you pushed you there,
because you haven't been,
you haven't been fortified
in regard to it.
But for as long as you remind,
like, oh,
it's still there.
So like,
three hours later,
or if you're doing whatever,
you look,
oh, the sensual mind,
it's still there.
It's enduring.
And it doesn't matter,
even if it stays forever,
it's still incriminating.
You know,
that it will have to cease.
So you might like,
last forever,
infinitely.
So to speak,
there is no end in sight
when you look at it.
But the fact
that it's arising
in this manifest means
that's why it will cease.
So infinite things
are incarnate.
They will come to an end,
with their infinity.
So when the new thing arises,
the new wonder arises,
the new infinity arises,
and then infinity is also
impermanent.
So it's like two completely
different domains.
There's nothing here.
Everything is.
Well,
these things that arise
always arise
with the sense of
being forever.
Yeah, yeah.
No.
They arise with infinity.
They arise because there's no,
there's no end in sight.
There's no end in,
like terms of the possibilities.
There's no end.
And that's what's mistaken as forever.
But actually,
you can have an infinite
range of things.
And then that's taken away.
And then you don't have
an infinite range of things anymore.
So that's how infinity
is impermanent.
So yes, I think I said
that in one way or another,
if basically if a person
were able to discern an infinite
from permanent,
we'll see.
Well, discern the difference,
and then you would recognize,
ah, actually,
permanent comes from me,
the assumption of permanent,
the assumption of forever.
Infinite,
it's kind of everything is infinite
in that sense,
because everything arises
with infinite amount of possibilities.
Well, it arises,
but when it ceases,
it ceases with infinite amount of possibilities.
I mean, new things manifested,
or other different things manifested,
also.
So everything arises in that,
like infinite structure of possibilities,
like infinite mind,
infinite permutations,
infinite design,
you can be seeking out
and trying to encompass them all anymore.
And you always have the more,
and you'll always be more
and more and more and more,
and more and more,
and more and more,
and more until it ceases.
So the whole thing,
the entire domain,
the entire domain of infinity
from the past,
all going to the future,
that's in permanent,
that's ceases.
On a particular level,
yeah, things last forever,
in that sense,
in that infinite sense,
until it ceases,
on the general level,
which is where it ceases.
So that's why it's another mistake
to look for impermanence
and actual, like,
in actual cessation of things,
when you look for them,
and you want to see their destruction,
and they're like,
ah, that's in permanent.
No, that's just another
a reason thing
with infinite possibility.
You're just witnessing
a phenomenon,
and a reason phenomenon
of destruction.
And that has a reason.
So that's why I mean,
when I say before,
or I say often,
things are not in permanent
because you see them cease.
Things are in permanent
because they have a reason
in the first place.
So their manifestation
means that's why
they're not in your control
because they are manifested.
You can't even
concede you creating
anything,
you manifesting anything.
Impossible.
And even when you think
of you creating something,
if you look closely,
whatever you're
kind of working with
in your mind in terms of you,
that was given before then.
So you always come in second.
It's so abandoning
the filaments of minds,
whichever the filaments
do abandon it
or not taking it as yours anymore.
Well, just before you go further,
the filaments were basically
deferred down to the whole range
or that like a generally affected
the background of your mind.
It's affected by centrality.
All the wealth into that particular push
that's pushing in a particular direction
or finding something like
a particular manifestation
of that general pressure
like vague and big use
central craving
that you find,
okay, you sort of centralizing
this particular thing
or that particular thing.
So that whole range
would be a defilement.
So you can start saying no
to these particular things,
sure, that is the first step.
But you should do that only
so that you can then start discerning
the phenomenon of your mind,
a reason on its own,
being affected by such and such
and holds some state.
But if you just go around
denying the things you need
onto you,
fine, but you're
carrying the very source
of the problem with you,
you're not addressing it.
You're not getting involved
with that sort of thing.
So yeah, seeing it
for what it is,
seeing grasping that sign
of that phenomenon,
of that mind,
as a reason in such and such
way means you're not
getting involved,
because you get involved
by not seeing it.
And that's why
that the first,
I don't know about that,
but one, the requisites,
it's pretty requisite
for sort of a party,
as I mentioned,
was grasping the sign
of your mind,
chip the limiter,
grasping that phenomenon
of that ambiguous,
vague cloud of the mind,
for what it is.
Not only defining it,
not okay,
this is what my mind is.
I'm not just seeing it
for what it is,
the way it has a reason.
When you start seeing it,
like the way it has a reason,
on its own,
and not adding more to it,
not taking away from it,
then that phenomenon,
because it's seen,
for what it is,
can't then be understood
as not mind.
But whenever there is
a form of involvement,
then that means appropriation.
So if you like,
something to it,
if you take away from it,
it means you still assume
that you can't add something to it,
that you can't take away something,
you're involved.
So then you're not seeing,
the clear sign of your mind,
so then you have to make it clear,
till you see it for what it is,
arising,
ceasing,
persistent or changing.
Or rather,
persistent or changing.
Because arising is
persistent or changing,
ceasing the way it's
persistent or changing.
Yeah, just basically seeing
the given state of mind
as not the rules.
Yeah, and you have to see
that it's better,
like it's better to be honest
because you first,
you get a clearer picture,
you might see it first time,
but you're never like,
oh, so at once,
and it was it,
no, it keeps seeing it,
and seeing it,
for how long?
Well, it depends,
how well established
the assumption of mind was,
in regard to that mind.
For some people it's more,
for some people it's less.
But I think,
given that it's done half a million
years since the Buddha died
and the kind of
pure dharma,
this fear,
it's probably more,
for most,
for all the people.
They need to do
much,
like lots of
undoing,
for those assumptions
to disappear.
But again,
that the universal principles
of dharma,
the path that the Buddha
himself only discovered
did not create,
it's always there.
So even if it's,
there's no Buddha
around,
no dharma around,
if somebody is repeating
these things correctly,
they would,
reach the same goal,
they would,
abandon the appropriation,
they would see a mind
for what it is.
And then the Buddha
did say that,
he's like,
I'm, like,
even put to you,
as even people
who don't have the right
of you,
who never heard,
like,
were not establishing
the right display,
the right display,
the right display,
and so on.
Even they
could actually experience
this passion,
this achievement
towards this body.
Why? Because,
what do you see,
bodies disgusting,
who is in,
getting sick,
liable to misfortune,
just anything,
and then see other people
dying and so on.
If you dwell on the
longing,
you will experience
revulsion and disenchantment,
and this experience
of passion in regard
to your body.
But it's,
it's hard,
and it's almost impossible
without the right view
and right instruction,
to experience the same
disenchantment
towards your own mind.
But,
in the same sense,
basically,
you can see that,
you can,
the fact that you can experience
this passion towards the
mind is also a phenomenon,
in the same sense,
your body is a phenomenon
towards which you can
experience that this passion.
So you say,
it's hard to experience this
passion of one,
because the mind is much
quicker,
much more ambiguous,
much more vague,
much more fleeting,
changes quickly,
moves around,
so you don't see it.
And by not seeing it,
you are appropriating it,
and you have been
appropriating for such a lot of time,
that it's almost,
like,
well, it feels almost
as if impenetrable,
to,
to, to,
like, there is no more choice,
mind,
just taking for granted,
then the mind is mind.
The mind is mind.
And,
but,
again,
with the property
instruction,
in terms of the,
the dominant practice,
and you could start discerning,
even that mind,
as a phenomenon.
No matter how quick it is,
generally,
it stays the phenomenon
of the mind.
So you don't,
you're not swayed,
but with particular movements
of the general mind,
general moves,
because they will always
remain general.
And then eventually,
you can,
but I don't even
passion,
enchantment of whatever
else with that,
as well.
Because,
another thing,
that's an icing season,
because this thing will
change you.
You're a man for this.
What is it, boy?
Huh?
No.
Sit.
Good.
Good.
Good.
It always.
Uh-huh.
But it always follows this,
okay.
See if your mind
has,
what kind of state
you're minding?
Is it default or not?
If it is,
bending,
that default,
that default mind.
Well,
Well, even if it isn't abandoned, even if it's not a defilement, even if it's happiness in good mood, don't take it to be yours.
So basically, seeing the mind regardless of what then mind is, whether it's defiled or not defiled, sure, don't entertain the defilements further when they are present in the general mind, by all means.
If it's happiness, well, again, be wary of that. You know, there's that, that's what I think.
I think Saliputo, and there was Saliputo said, once you regard pleasure as a, like a painful arrow, dangerous arrow, and then pain has like a deadly.
Pleasure, pleasure, pleasure. Pleasure is a dark pain is a dead arrow, something an arrow. So sure, pleasure is not harmful not an awesome, but it's dangerous if you don't see a mind in regard to it, which means, then when another mind comes, you won't see that either.
So you can't like, oh, well, you know, I look at, it's not the bothers me, but I'm not going to look at stuff because it shows the same nature. So you can abandon my bothers you, only by abandoning the nature of the entire thing, and that thing also includes the nature of happy mind, or related mind, or good mind.
You know, you're not going to be taken, you're not going to get elated by it.
Exactly, so relation is there, great, I don't have to do anything about it, but I certainly can also not get involved with it, not get taken by it.
So to, when he knows his mind is unstained and defiled, then joy arises.
Yeah, that's different. Yeah, that's like a type of joy that arises when, not like the joy that comes as a kind of cloud of your mind.
No, there's a state of your mind, but the joy that arises in regard to knowing your mind. In the same sense, again, inside the Buddha said, there is a pleasure arising in regard to not feeling any pleasure or pain for another hand, and that's very pleasant.
Yes, the thing is the joy of the mind is undefiled.
Yeah, sure, you should cultivate joy of knowing your mind, which is a joy that doesn't depend on the state of your mind, doesn't depend on your mind full stop.
Yeah, that's what it's, that's what it's so like.
Yeah, I want to joy, I want to defile it, to be replaced by the joy of it.
You can replace it with joy. You can replace both the fun and enjoy joyful mind. You replace that.
Or rather, by abandoning that, you experience joy that doesn't depend neither on the fun, nor on your mind, nor on anything basically that's impermanent, which is why that pleasure is not unwholesome.
And that's like the pleasure of the Janus, similar. It's because it's not unwholesome fun, you have to worry about it, you can even cultivate it.
And it's not unwholesome because it's not underlined by the like late tendencies, though it's craving, though it's this, though.
So it's a different, it's not a joy that it's not happiness that has a reason on a kind of happy mind, because the mind is elated.
It's not the happiness that has a reason, no. It's a happiness that has a reason in regard to knowing what mind, to recognizing the mind, to seeing the phenomenon of that mind, to not being moved but to being stronger than that mind.
So the big, heavy cloud of that mind be good or bad, wants to take you, wants to pressure you, wants to make you go certain way, and you will for as long as that cloud's stronger than you.
But when you become stronger, and then it's like the simulator, teraterigator, you know, it means like a mountain, and no matter what clouds and storms can't, it just does not move, impossible.
That doesn't mean there are no storms and clouds coming, on the contrary, means it just does move.
And there's another sort of, what I said, for other hand, is not overwhelmed by his mind, he is the one who overwhelms his mind.
And so, you develop in regard to, and you can only start developing in regard to your mind, where you grasp the sign of that mind.
Oh, this is what the mind is. That's the naming of the mind, and then you start developing in regard to that.
So it's not about the requirements, never arising in game, but it's the assumption that the requirements of mind, or the mind is mind.
Yes, the requirements are the requirements only when they're affecting you, only when you're taking by them, when you took them.
But there will still be the requirements.
Things that defile will still arise, but they will not defile you. That's a different thing.
You still have mud and dirt, but now you're not getting dirty by it.
Before, you would, whenever there's mud, you were muddy. Whenever there's dirt, you were dirty. But now you clean your mind, and you can't get dirty, so that again, similarly, like the Lotus on top of a horrible swam filthy pond.
Not touched by it.
But also, when the Buddha means mud, mud always comes around.
Yeah, the mud still kept coming, but the Buddha was just like always seeing. He would always discern.
Like, there wouldn't be even a remote possibility that he might not be able to see him. Why? Because he penetrated the whole nature, and that's what an argument is the same.
He understood the full nature and abandoned it, so no matter what arises, it can never defile him again.
That's there are no defilements. But yes, the stone clouds and stuff will keep arising.
Because it was arising with some to begin with. It's nothing to do with you from the start.
The Buddha said that, actually, when you got to Mahara, he said, well, the reason why Mahara can do with people where he wants, I pushed them in the directions and just make them engage in stuff, is because they take that which is his.
Like, you go that in his domain, you yourself go in his domain, then you can't complain for him doing what he wants with you.
Well, he said, and what is it that belongs to Mahara that people use? Like, I and Sites, ear and sounds, no, basically everything.
Your whole sense is everything in and out belongs to Mahara.
Where is the tension in the air? Hey!
Yeah, because there is this, does Angus advise him to put it in? No. Yeah, it's not his, but it's anger. Well, it wouldn't. Like, you can't use the same designation or the same term, anger. If you use it as anger for protrusion, I, a state that he's been defiled by, and it's resulting in anger, you can't use the same for the Buddha.
So, you can say that things that would give rise to anger, still arise for the Buddha, but he's not angry. He doesn't give rise to actually anger.
So, when they're about to try to kill him and stuff, everybody would, anybody would be angry, who would want to go to another, or be upset, or feel a little well, but he didn't.
Nope, and it doesn't mean that he was oblivious to what David Arthur was doing. He was a foolish man. He's an idiot, basically. He's behavior is going to lead to, like, a long, long, lasting harm for him and so on.
But he was an angry or a counter. He couldn't have been. So, those things that defile are still there, because that's Mahara's domain.
And they will remain there, for as long as these senses are in this body, this fire is going to break apart, when you reach his body, and that's then it's done.
So, that is the joy. He knows that he has abandoned the state of longing, and joy is there, and then a rapture, and then his body is calm, and his mind is concentrated.
So, you didn't say he was, he said he's rapturous. You always get the same luck as he later, and you're getting all this excitement.
Yeah, I think it's a translation.
I think it's sugar.
Which was a translation with rapture, but I think rapture comes from a Christian concept, rapture.
Like, when you're divine, you know, touch it or whatever, and then you have that bodily elation of rapture.
But it's not.
Well, you can see through, like, well, you can get a glimpse of it through discerning the sign of humanity.
You can see that it leads to that kind of immobility, equanimity, like, indifference.
Now, the difference tells you of cruel or oblivious or blind. It just means nothing can move you.
And then that, so, again, you can also see through that, that through discernment of the phenomenon of your mind,
then you start feeling content, and joy, that you are the one overwhelming your mind, not your mind,
you're wondering, what are your eyes?
No matter how high you are, there's a chopping up your limbs, and brutalizing you in every possible way.
You still overwhelm that mind, that mind doesn't overwhelm you.
And that's some, some, like, extreme development, strength, and joy, and a bubble.
You would, you would, like, well, you would know that.
And you can see that it leads up to when it comes to, like, through knowing your mind,
you experience that joy, and then that results automatically in a concentration.
So you don't get concentration through watching your nostrils or something,
and you kind of develop this concentration, and kind of all, no, you get concentration through discernment of right things.
So by all means, yeah, meditate, and then sit, cross-negative, whatever, to discern what your mind, the sign of your mind,
the clouds of your mind, the movement, whatever, see this phenomenon, and then fortify yourself in regard to it,
and you'll be concentrated automatically, whether you're going to vid it, where you're going to town,
when you sit alone, when you live on top of the hill, your mind is established.
You know, to step one, abandon, defendants, and okay, now I've done that.
Now come for the next session, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth, a tooth.
Well, it's wishful thinking, if it would only be like that, just here is a set, set a prescribed set of motions, and little methods you do, and you get there.
The only set, the only, the only method is, develop understanding of the wrong things.
And when you do it, it will result in that.
Because abandoning the mind, state of mind, I can say I want to abandon the farmans, but then I won't.
I want to hold on to the joy, to the happiness.
Yeah, and that's often why people experience fear, because you think, oh, well if I, like sure, I want abandoning pain,
but that means I have to give up all these joys and pleasures of the life forever, and the Buddhism.
But it's true, that's what you do.
It's true.
You have to abandon it, and it's you, yeah.
You have to abandon the whole thing, but it doesn't mean that you become joyless, or that means you discover a different type of happiness.
And that's again what the Buddha said, replace the household happiness.
I, the happiness of sensuality, the happiness of a lay life, replace that with happiness of renunciation.
And see with the pain, replace the pains, the bothers, the troubles of a lay life with pains of renunciation, of an ascetic life.
It's much more wholesome, it's much more pleasant.
And you know, you can stop and think about it. You know, after being among for a number of years, living relatively secluded, and so on.
Yeah, you know, they're obviously hardships of physical kind, and also to things.
They enjoy it, whatever.
But nothing is there, is actually comparable to stuff you had to deal with as a lay person, when you were still in the world with your job and stress, and just in the swamp.
The swamp, of emotional issues, and duties, and burdens.
And that just accumulates.
So whether you're 15, 20, 30 years old, they would just keep growing, but it's there.
And that's why you have the burden. You will only lay down in the burden.
You lay down in the burden, but obviously that burden extends to all the previous lives, and all the ones that install for you if you don't get out.
But it is, and you realize, oh, it's actually, yeah.
Like, I can't tell you how it's much more pleasant here, living with wild tigers and stuff.
Well, you might die next moment, but it's just clean. Emotionally clean.
It's not burdening you. It's free. It's freedom, in that sense.
But that takes time to develop.
The mind is used to the swamp of centrality, distractions, and so on. This seems like death.
And that's why people will freak out when they will hear the good news.
But if you were to develop a fortify your mind and become accustomed to it, then you start seeing bad news.
And I was like, oh, no, this is a freedom. But yeah, freedom, for those who are unaware, it's basically death.
They will be able to hold it.
Yeah, because it's nothing else. You only used to be involved with things.
Yeah. Well, yeah, you become essentially dependent upon involvement.
So there is nothing. You just, like, boredom sets in, and then boredom gets replaced by the exact in red.
So quickly finally something that will keep my mind away from me, from my own state.
Because I'll sink in.
But if you know the correct path, and even then boredom.
What the reason for boredom?
You go through it and it doesn't rise anyway.
Because boredom only rises in regard to, like, a custom levels of distraction.
And then when they are absent, then you feel bored.
I, as a kind of like a gentle unpleasant sort of push towards compagnen.
And boredom is that neutral feeling, which is, when unknown, it's unpleasant.
Actually, now there's nothing. There's nothing exciting.
No, not exciting. It's even.
But because you go used to only the excitement that even is unpleasant now.
And you go back to the excitement.
All the depression.
All the depression for that matter.
The depression is only the depression in regard to things that you are depressed.
And that's again, like, when you do know that unpleasant, that neutral feeling,
boredom or depression, when you know it, it's not the present anymore.
When you discern it.
It's quite peaceful.
But it takes time to develop, to discern that criteria of what peace is.
Yeah, not scared of it, I don't think it's.
Yeah, exactly. It gets scared of it.
Because you became so dependent on the constant movement, constant action, constant something.
Good or bad, just as long as something is happening.
Because otherwise, I'll just drown.
And that's pretty much everyone's life on there.
Because if you think you're in control, well, okay, just decide to stop.
Just decide to stop engaging.
Stop giving into destruction.
And then you'll see what's going to arise.
And for how long you'll be able to hold it, to hold you determination.
And the thing is, it's not really optional to do this.
You might think how well you know.
It will end in death and destruction and terror and dread.
Start your fear throughout your life.
That direction of that fear, that's what death is.
So sooner or later, you will be taken there.
So you might want to prepare yourself, or even if you're able to go through it beforehand.
So when it arises, it doesn't concern you anymore.
It doesn't pertain to your being anymore.
Why? Because you extinguish it.
Come, done.
I just just called die before you die.
Literally.
Remove the life, remove power, the being.
From ever before, it's forcefully taken away.
Because that means you keep coming back.
You're dead.
That's a beautiful place.
Yeah. Well, exactly.
Yeah, death becomes another preparation.
And you haven't been, you haven't been,
when you haven't let go of the appropriation of the fire aggregates fundamentally.
So you will have to endure their destruction and reappearing and destruction.
And reappearing and destruction.
Because that's what they do.
Nothing obliges you to stay with them.
In the same sense, nothing obliges you to stay with the clouds of the mind when they arise.
But you do, because you don't know any better.
But when you do know something, like when you don't know better,
and you develop better, better than you are.
Then the development,
and developing your mind,
developing states of mind.
What about that?
Well, again, you can use the same designation, but it means a different thing.
If you want to say accurate, but you're developing in regard to your mind,
which is a development of the mind.
Because even if you yourself are not revolving around a general peripheral cloud of ill will,
that has a reason, let's say,
you'll stop entertaining, and in particular notions of ill will,
through not engaging in those particular notions of ill will,
you wouldn't be fueling that cloud back.
So it will arise, but it will arise less and less.
And then certain things that might defile might arise, but they will not defile.
And to know that you cannot be defiled,
they cannot possibly linger in any sense of defilement.
And I was like,
I think, was it an underworld,
a Buddha or somebody else,
was an underworld?
No, he was an underworld Buddha.
Or maybe not.
Doesn't matter.
Point is, somebody else, I think, was an underworld,
and they said,
oh, I don't.
You see, always feels the pleasure of his enlightenment all the time.
And then, and then Buddha said,
no, no.
Like, in the beginning when somebody develops to the point of our attitude,
yeah, there would be that novelty of that time of release.
But after all, they didn't use it.
And then, they would feel pleasure, same pleasure of our energy,
only in certain instances,
when they would end up in circumstances or something
that would, like in the past,
give rise to the defilements of anger,
or sensuality, or something.
But now, you wouldn't.
So, like, they would recognize the same set of everything identical,
but no response internally.
It's just fully extinguished internally.
It cannot even be conceived to kind of reappear again,
and then they feel pleasure again.
Ah, I am indeed free.
Not that they need a reminder,
but when it happens, they'll feel that joy for, like,
oh, yeah, I remember when this used to pull me left and right,
and control me for, you know, days and end.
And then, just walk off, continue.
And so, the problem behind us,
is the kindness, it's not the kindness as a different kind of kindness.
It's a different kind of...
Well, see, once again, once you grasp the sign of your mind,
then you can start attending to what that sign is in different ways.
But you can't start practicing browning hours of,
or any other, establishment of mind properly.
If you don't have the sign of your mind.
But once you, like, fully established in the,
in the recognize in the phenomena of your mind,
you're not even mistaking it anymore.
You see it.
Then, yeah, then, okay, why don't you gladden that mind?
That phenomenon is right in front of you.
Just relax it.
Gladden it.
Why don't you regard it with loving kindness?
Why don't you regard it?
With equality.
Practice immobility in regard to that phenomenon of the mind.
Regardless of what that mind is,
whether it's effective or sensuality or happiness or whatever,
you're not concerned anymore with your particular hindrance of that mind.
You are just looking in the nature of the sign of that mind,
which is the development of mind.
So, you are developing that mind or other in regard to that mind.
Once you have kind of stepped away,
this through discernment of that sign of the mind
and not being, not being, like, even the jannas
or whatever when you establish your mind first,
you basically depend on the five hindrances.
You put them away.
Through discernment, and then you get established in that,
and then the joy arises from that seclusion and so on and so forth.
Pramu, Vihara, is there any other type of establishment mind?
It was the same, or rather, pertains to the same levels.
So, your kind is a confused, putugina,
left and right.
It doesn't even discern what a phenomenon of that peripheral mind is,
and then he practices in beings,
radiating, loving, kindness and stuff.
Let's just wish for thinking.
They might make you feel better,
but it doesn't really make any fundamental difference.
Why? Because if you're doing loving kindness correctly,
it should be resulting eventually in a pecan,
in the quantity, in complete,
or in immobility.
And you know, you visualizing, loving everyone and stuff,
and going to make a big difference there.
Why? Because you're not applying it to the right place.
So, it needs to be applied to that framework,
as Nariya mentioned, to the framework of others.
And that's for the sign of the mind,
the framework of one's other.
You are another to yourself, really.
You're just less external of that than the others.
But when you start seeing your mind,
or other minds,
a reason on their own,
you realize this is like, yeah,
there is an agreement externally,
in that person,
there is an agreement internally,
I, in this person,
but not of it is mine.
So, yeah.
Then you apply loving kindness,
if you can use the word apply.
Basically, you regard that phenomenon,
that sign of that mind,
with loving kindness.
You are taking control of that independent mind,
then arises.
But you are taking control,
like practicing certain attitudes in regard to it.
You are not taking control by kind of repossessing it,
by taking, like, by reappropriating it,
by making in mind, mind again.
No. Yeah.
You fully get established in that attitude of this,
not just that it ain't mine,
but it cannot even be mine,
because if it were mine,
it wouldn't have been a rising on its own.
But if it rises on its own,
that's absolutely no more doubt
that it cannot be mine.
That's basically the right view.
And when you have absolutely no doubt
that it cannot even be yours,
even if you want to,
and you can't even want to,
because that would be a form
of taking it out of the yours.
When you establish it, then yeah.
Regarding loving kindness,
or gliding it,
or release it,
or do this,
or do that.
But that's like the,
there would be the practice of samadhi.
Establishing your mind in such a way,
once you've seen it correctly,
and once you've got it all ready.
Yeah, that also seems,
you know, secondary priorities.
Well, it's become natural.
Yeah, it will come.
Like, the concentration will come as a result of that joy.
They will come as a result of recognizing the mind
for what it is,
and feeling, well,
sheltered, feeling safe from it,
feeling not burdened by it anymore.
Can you feel joyful?
Can you feel joyful?
You feel calm.
You feel calm.
You feel concentrated.
And that's what concentration is.
Yeah, it's awesome.
Everything just,
we say that,
it follows from that,
or goes from that.
Yeah.
Equanimity.
That's what it needs to be,
it needs to be rooted
in the right view,
in the right discernment.
Why? Because it's a protuginal,
and the person here is a concentration.
They have a protuginal's idea of concentration.
Which means,
if they then engage in a method
and a practice,
they'll be revolving around their protuginal's idea of concentration.
Which means,
there will not be the right concentration.
And samadhi is such that,
imaginary color,
like every,
every aspect of the normal day of the party,
comes with a right view first.
The right view makes it all right.
And it's like so self-explanatory,
that it's actually very hard to see.
Yeah.
And obviously,
because it's not,
there is not like middle ground.
Oh yes,
I don't see,
but I can still do it right now.
You can't.
That's a contradiction in terms.
I'll do everything else.
I'll learn what it for a practice.
Yeah.
Yeah, I'm not,
like I'm not at the right view,
but I still know how to meditate.
That doesn't make sense.
Yeah.
That's rather nonsense.
Same there.
Or I'm like,
sure,
if knowing how to meditate means doing
one or what,
one on the way,
but not the,
not the meditation,
the Buddha within courage.
So it needs to come with a right view.
And when there is a right view,
it will come out of the right view.
So as you said yourself,
oh,
discerning the sign of the mind,
all the films come,
all the films come,
feeling calm,
joy is our, joy arises,
feeling joy,
concentration is established.
Concentration is established,
we can continue from other cities,
seeing clearly even more,
gets fully developed,
like seeing things clearly
to the full extent means,
means complete destruction
of the fetters,
clearly insight in wisdom,
pinealiberate,
that's it,
done.
It's not just, you know,
just don't bother with trying to understand,
just stick to a prescribed method,
of like physical notions
and observations,
or the nostrils,
and stuff,
because it makes you feel better
in your pathogen world.
And then just keep going back to it whenever you need it.
Even while staying pathogen.
Yeah,
even while it's speech.
Look,
there is nothing right
in the state of pathogen,
which is why it's a state of pathogen.
Now, even a bit,
it might be nice speech.
It might be lovely speech,
but it's not necessarily right.
So that's why the
sole concern of somebody,
who is still a pathogen,
needs to be developing the right view,
because then they will make everything as right.
So I developed a view through this sermon,
through this sermon,
through this sermon,
where you're not well,
through this sermon,
you can discern things
by knowing what you're supposed to discern.
And you can know what you're supposed to discern
by investigating what the options are
with this sermon,
so to speak.
That's like what we spoke
in the other talk,
when I was a yesterday or day before.
Like measuring the task,
and so on.
But as you can see,
like what we spoke about now,
in terms of the
chip,
the limit and the phenomenon of the mind,
and like a general cloud,
the mood and so on,
it's not,
well, it's not abstract,
because that
that chip that is both
your feelings and your perception,
which is what the term is the mind.
So you feel,
like that mood,
you might be able to even describe it
in certain terms of perception,
but you also feel it simultaneously.
Like that pressure of the mood,
you can all
any mood,
like even if you can't quite define what it is,
one thing you know for sure is,
whether it's pleasant or unpleasant,
fundamentally,
whether it's kind of okay,
or kind of not okay,
or kind of,
nah, nah, nah.
So you start feeling it properly
through this sermon in your mind,
which is why,
for this sermon in the mind,
results in complete destruction
of your feelings,
of suffering and so on.
It's not,
oh, I need to discern it,
abstractly together,
get my head around it,
and then,
I'll apply it.
Now, getting your head around it,
right leg means applying it, right leg.
That's how you can have, like,
one liberated through wisdom,
through, like,
just through the sermon,
so powerful,
the results in complete destruction of fetus.
Here we go.
You have a mind of your will,
then, which is unpleasant,
it is unpleasant.
But then,
you think by,
you want to get away from that,
unpleasant or pain,
and then you want to get to the pleasure,
so you give in.
Yeah,
and that gives you pleasure,
the mask,
that's fundamental pain.
Same essentiality.
Fundamentally,
sensuality is unpleasant.
Remember, I was speaking about this before,
like, for some point,
it was engaged in centrality.
Essential desire arises.
You just give in.
You just go for it for satisfaction,
and it just feels,
the whole thing just feels pleasant.
Then, you'll find a reason
to practice restraint,
all restraints forced upon you.
Like, you can't have your desires fulfilled.
And then, you experience this tremendous pain,
like a dart,
as the sutras refer.
Pacing pain of,
and you think,
initially, without any wisdom,
youth, everybody would think,
that that pain is a result of me saying no,
to my desires.
But if you stick to it long enough,
you start discerning that actually no.
My restraint, my saying no,
only made me neutral
in regard to the reason thing,
and what was revealed then was pain.
And that's why,
we give in to the central design,
because it's so painful, not to.
When you mind is taken by centrality,
it's very painful to not give in.
So you don't even consider it,
on top of that,
giving in then,
not just the mask that initial appears
of the centrality of, like, pain,
it doesn't just mask that,
but then it coats it
with pleasure on top of it,
like satisfaction of age,
enjoyment of the senses.
So you kind of have not just avoiding pain,
but getting pleasure
out of avoiding pain.
It's like a double wedding.
And that's why it's so hard to break away from it.
And that's why,
like, the minds are so
bogged down in it,
that even if you were to start practicing your restraint,
that whole pain in their eyes
is you wouldn't be attributing it to centrality,
because you're so deluded.
You'd be thinking, no, this is coming from me,
so you know.
But basically, you saying yes or no
should not make an emotional difference
to anything you were about to do
or you were doing.
If it is making difference, means that thing
is emotionally evolving.
And if it's emotionally evolving, means it's not awesome.
So basically, whatever you were about to do,
just say no to yourself
and see if any emotions are going to rise,
if they do, means you're involved there
and your restraint, you're saying no
is just revealing you that.
It's not adding anything to it.
No taking away anything from it.
So that's why, like, that pain of restraint,
is not actually pain of restraint.
It's pain of centrality that's revealed
through restraint.
And you see that
sufficiently enough,
some people sooner or some people later,
you would not...
Like, your mind wouldn't go
but wouldn't go to the centrality once or ever.
It could really relish and enjoy the restraint.
Because restraint is freedom from it.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, and resulting.
Well, yeah, concentrate.
And what, resulting in escape
from the whole...
By not, by...
Sorry, by by...
By attributing the pain to restraint,
you're always going to have like a romantic
pleasurable, delightful notions of centrality.
And now you're just grinding against
through whatever sets of, like, morals
and virtues that you adopted externally
but not really knowing why.
Because it always feels...
And that's what we said.
He doesn't welcome, he doesn't delight
the centrality.
Okay, you have to start practicing those attitudes.
You don't welcome it, you don't delight in it.
Because even if you practice the restraint,
if you never ever engage
in any bodily act of centrality through any sense,
you still can entertain it in your mind
for the rest of your life.
But if you abandon it in the mind,
then automatically you won't be able to engage
in it by body.
And there's another similar in the suitors
with, like, having a trying to light a fire
with two fire sticks, they were in water.
Like, okay, sure, you take them out of the water first.
You can't light them while they're still in the river.
But unless they dry outside of the water,
you still wouldn't be able to light a fire.
Okay, I'm out of the water, but they're still wet.
So, like, one's mind still remains wet,
even when the body is withdrawn from centrality.
The mind still remains wet in regard to it.
And the mind remains wet
for as long as you're misplacing where the real pain comes from.
By misplacing the real pain,
you look for the pleasure in the wrong place.
Like, consequently.
It gets very confusing if you're trying to,
you know, attack the mind,
clear it out with adding this and adding that
and fight it with kindness.
Destroy you.
Well, you're just, just throwing more confusion
onto the already existing pile of confusion.
Because you've got to make this
and make sure, what's happening now?
Yeah, what was it?
Discounting and tasting.
No, it's this side, just that.
But it all leaves you out.
Just you doing this and you're going to that.
The dresses you know,
the very criteria of what made you choose
to decide to do this against that in the first place.
Because that's already affected by ignorance.
Yet, you took it for granted,
that your power of decision is already right
and knows the way it out.
So I'll just do this when I do that.
This makes sense.
Again, if somebody's honest that they know that,
okay, I don't have a right view.
Thus, even what makes sense to me is not right.
It's necessarily, I do not know.
So then you really have to stop.
Well, certainly,
you certainly have to stop
using the criteria of what feels right
and what feels good.
Because it basically is because of the feelings
that you are not analyzing.
So using that as a criteria
to the enlightenment is a contradiction in terms.
So you need to use discernment.
Literally, start developing the discernment.
What makes sense?
Use your reason.
Use develop wisdom understanding.
And in big, by big, on top of that,
you end up with more.
You build more, and it will progress.
They will then result
in discernment of the fundamental things,
such as your feelings,
your intentions, and so on, and they'll feel from it.
I mean, all the way I've talked about it,
really, when mental is understanding,
developing understanding.
Same thing is clearly.
He knows he sees.
He knows that he knows he sees and he sees.
