One other point I wanted to clarify, did I read this already, but in the same way as
everything has to be a somehow or include within one or more of the Pantribudanakanda, that
in the same way every determination, Sankara must also be one or more of the Pantribudanakanda.
Obviously, to me that makes sense if everything is within the Pantribudanakanda,
the Terminations are within everything. That's the same thing when it said, I think
they thought it was certain, they said, well what are the Sankaras and it's just less
five aggregates again. So it's just things bound together. And because these things are bound
together, because intentions are bound with your reason for no one on a particular level,
it's just inseparable from. So that's what it is Sankara. So then when you intentionally
intend the given intentions, that's what your volition is. So that's why volition comes also
under the same sort of umbrella kind of nature of Sankara is bound with that.
That's whatever possibility is there. So the difference between an other hunt and
putugina in terms of these structural Sankaras and Sankaras in general, it's would be the directionality
of those Sankaras. For a putugina, they would be revolving around the center, which is his self
or his conceit, and they would be either directed towards or away or both or neither, but it
would have implication of that mind and their direction. For an other hunt, it just wouldn't.
It would be things are significant, things are intentional. Volition would be just a result
preferent, we would be just a result of given choices, and fully less upon things,
than they're given by things. There's absolutely no interference of any conceit
or the idea of a center that owns the money, police, and churches, and masters.
There's a footnote to the passage, but I think it's pretty straightforward. It's basically just
explaining how Chaitanana are negative. It gives the example of a sheet of paper, which
at least in that utilitarian level makes sense. I like when he says like the positive things,
existence is asserted by the negative in the very act of denying it, just as atheism,
which exists as denial of theism, is evidence that the is an existence.
He takes that principle, takes that principle of assertion of the positive through the denial
that comes from the negative. After the very fundamental level, where a thing appears, that's it,
that's all. So you don't have to think about any further significance that is developed, just have
form is manifested. See, there is already that division, already that sort of denial of that form
by the consciousness, which is the whole result. The manifestation is the whole result of that
relationship of consciousness is not that form. Hence that form is able to appear as that form.
Obviously, form in itself does not need consciousness, but then we can't talk about appearance,
but the thing is we have the appearance. So from appearance, you can sort of reverse engineer
and realize the relationship that's necessary for that appearance to be, or have a direct insight
into it. That's what consciousness is to be understood, as the Buddha said. So that the very
principle, like atheism, the confirmed state is amazing. That's a very, very proliferated sort of
example of the same principle whereby just appearance already means denial of that which has appeared
to be the same as the point of view. Like sort of a separation. Yeah, I don't want to say,
oh, it's denial of it by consciousness because then consciousness becomes another thing that
denials everything because consciousness is defined by that which is not it. In the same sense,
that it is possible to be it because it's not that consciousness. That's why consciousness is
a fundamental negative, it's a fundamental samkara. And that's why consciousness, that's where
consciousness is rooted. Consciousness is that which points at the self through that basic most
fundamental division denial or creates creating of this appears this appears this which is different
from me basically. So it doesn't say consciousness doesn't say there is me but it kind of indicates it.
Oh, this is different then and then you fill the blank. Not me because I'm always here and all
these things are changing and appearing and disappearing but I stay the same. So it was then
most of the mental kind of affirmation of the positive through its denial of its own identity
so to speak by the consciousness. The consciousness indicates that then there is something to which
all these things are being manifested. But it never fills it up, it never completes it, it never
produces itself because it can't. So you just eternal generates the power through the denying of
the actual thing that's appearing, that's manifesting. That's how generates the power of the indication
of that self. So that's why you go back to those things and the way they're determined
and then you see that oh, it is just an indication and it's such is positive in itself as well.
Not as positive as the thing that's being denied in its appearance but certainly positive because
you can think about it, you can discern it, you can recognize it and as such you drain the power
away from it. What is this? The indication here for me. Things appear for you. On top of that
the things appear for you, they can appear to be yours or this can be mine. Now this is mine.
And all of that, all that basic kind of very fundamental conceit is indicated by the consciousness
through that same principle of as he described it, the negative through this sort of denial
of the sameness, like, oh, I'm not that which appears for me. It starts indicating that you are
something else. I am not that which appears for me. Well, you don't even have to think that
explicitly. Obviously, I have to say it somehow, but it kind of would precede even the designation
of the words, but it is the mental attitude of when something has a reason, it's a separate thing.
Right, yeah, I can understand that I think a gross level of the whole like subject object dichotomy
that's natural attitude. It's just the thing is that the subject originates from that basic
kind of indication, just like a pointer that's created by consciousness by the denial of the
thing that you have conscious of. And there's just a natural experience, matter,
juxtapose to consciousness. The result is manifestation of the form. And the conceivings that
Malapariya also talks about, for example, didn't fall under that kind of subtle that the
directionality or just pointing. There wouldn't be the actual fully fledged development, but it's
because of that pointing that channeling, that kind of ushering, with ignorance, you just carry
on further, because obviously it's with the grain, it's with the direction that everything is made
out of, so there's absolutely no reason for you to start doubting that. Until much later, obviously,
when you're dissatisfied with the nature of existence, and I think Malapariya comes across the
dam, and he says, yeah, you go against that thing. Up to the point whereby in seeing there is only
the scene in her, up to the point when he manifested, there is only the manifested, there is no more
indicated assumption. Or other indication is, it perceives the assumption, is because it indicates
at something, you start assuming that something's there, and then obviously stop seeing the indication,
because assumption takes over. So it's a matter of someone being indicated, but it doesn't necessarily
mean that what is being indicated is necessarily, so to say, well, real. Well, it is real as an
indication, but that's the thing, if it's not known as such, there is already a degree of, well,
just by having lack of knowledge in regard to that indication, that's only takes, for that
indication, to be fully manufacturing a sense of self. And you feed that manufacturing, you feed that
result through not understanding it. That's all it takes, you don't need to make any other mistakes,
or do something wrong with our bullet. Just to not understanding it, you're actually feeding it.
And understanding, basically, this positive, negative relationship?
Yeah, at a very, very fundamental point of consciousness and matter, but it's the same,
the principle remains the same there, and it's the same principle that kind of grows,
further, and further, and further, and to all of the, to, like, even intentionality,
the usage of certain objects for various different things, those various different things,
are all product of that kind of secondary indication of you being conscious of that thing
at the fundamental level. So if you're conscious of the arisen object, arisen shape,
arisen need, intentionality will be there. So if I have a need to bang a hammer into the wall,
well, I would look for something they would fulfill that need in that sense.
And based on my experience, something sturdy, something that can take that nail into the wall,
it won't break under it, it won't get punctured, but if I can't find anything, I'll start kind
of going even wider, and then I might use the back of this metal cup, or I might find a stone,
not ideal, not perfectly tailored for that, but it's still there, and it can serve the purpose.
So all of that does not necessarily require a sense of self, but it's on the same level of that kind
of intentionality of things, the negative sort of thoughts in regard to things, the usage,
the possibility in regard to things, it's on the same level that there is also a particular intention
that it's for me, it involves me, it's apart from me, it's in me, it's outside me, it's in relation
to me, and that relation can be kind of, well, can go anyway. It doesn't matter what it is, as long as it
implies you. So if you remove you, then yeah, you can still use an hammer, Arran can go and
go and bend the nails into the wall if he needs it, you won't be like puzzle, you know, like a
primate sort of picking up a tool and looking at it, like there's no one to do with it,
because he lost all the concepts now, doesn't work like that. All he has lost is the appropriation
of the experience as a whole, he has lost the conceit, he has lost that point in that
indication, that literature is indication of that center, independent of anything else, that sort
of centering it, because center cannot be known if there is nothing peripheral to it,
that just wouldn't be a center, yet center starts believing that it's independent of everything
and nothing, and all of it peripheral is nothing to do with me on the center, but how can you
have that center if there are no peripheral things? That's the same, like people think things
are mine because I am, but it's completely the other way around, you first assume the
use, that's how you generate the sense I am, and then on top of that you fully develop
view, I am, completely independent of everything, and then yeah, then you just start to property
more things and taking that as a, at a face value, as a complete kind of basis of your experience,
yeah, we talked about that before in terms of sense basis, how the mind is like central
in a way, and people take it all right, exactly, exactly, we kind of mirrors the similar
relationship, and then it's effortless to assume, to assume the same.
And in the last time we had that discussion about, well, it started with like talking about
atheism, by denying theism, asserts the existence of theism, and we got into that whole conversation
about that same kind, similar kind of relationship between negative, positive, conscious,
sense number, so on. And I just had a bunch of different thoughts that kind of came out from me,
thinking, trying to think about that some more, well at the same time, reading through the note on
the teacher some part, like carefully, slowly, and stuff like that, so I just wanted to share some
things from them by you asking questions about, much through that. So we basically, if I understood
correctly, asserted that basically this idea of a negative denying the positive is like a
necessary structural feature, like that's how things can be positively manifested at all,
there has to be that which is not manifested there too. Sometimes people might not be able to
understand that quite clearly because you kind of start with the negative possibilities of the
present thing, but even the present thing is what's real, the actual thing feels what's real,
and possibilities seems optional. But once you're looking at the nature of possibilities,
that kind of negative is like not this, then you realize that it extends all the way down to the
presence of that thing, which is what consciousness is, and then you realize, oh, this is actually
more fundamental than the actual thing, it's the manifold possibilities, it structurally precedes
the actual thing, the single thing is the present, but they actually precede it.
So that's basically where all these thoughts kind of start trying to understand how that
why there is absolutely necessary, and then further trying to understand, think about that
whole thing we talked about with indicating that is generated by this duality, so to say,
and there is a few things that came out of that. I kind of had this thought that when we have
this positive indication, like indicating this is for me that I am not that, which is for me,
there's this kind of assumption that myself is behind even what that is, that the negative being
indicated, like there's a negative, but then there's me behind that, like in terms of like a
directional kind of way, you know, is also thinking like sometimes, it feels as though
like self as a phenomenon can almost, you know, be positive and negative.
Yeah, exactly, that's what I think that's when we were sort of on one level, that's similar.
So it's the ultimate negative, but at the same time, it's the, it's kind of the center of your
universe, so it feels as a positive dimension, but if you were to look at it positively,
these are still separate fingers, it's nothing positive there, yet there is a very,
very strong positive sense of that, of that self, but there's a thing you said that for me,
it feels like it's even behind the negative, possibility there it is, that's how it feels,
in order to kind of bring it back in, and actually, the very thing you just said,
it feels behind, that's why the assumption of Atorada, that there is a,
this translated belief, belief in self, belief in self.
Yes, the common translation isn't it, yeah.
Well, that's where that belief, basically, it's found upon the assumption of
notion that yourself is completely external to your experience as a whole, that it's
an outside of it, and that stems from that very, more subtle assumption of for me also being
behind things that are for me, ultimately, even behind the negative possibilities that actually
determine as for me, but you end up assuming it that you are not within that picture,
that that for me is independent of it, which is why it's a particular, as it's peculiar nature,
which is why, obviously, the whole Patitamphabha exists with Patudjana, and then because of that,
on the subtle level for me notion, then when it comes down to the whole self, you that also assume
behind and everywhere below and above, basically, experiences as a whole,
I or Biggest Smoke can be self is outside of it, or it can be outside of it,
and that's, that's nothing other than Atorada.
So you would, you would kind of reel that back in, not by sort of, you can't sort of catch it,
because automatically, the way you look already implies that, so you look, carries the distortion,
so to speak, but then within that, you can, you can start looking as a, no matter what's behind,
no matter how ambiguous the background is, it's always going to share the nature of a negative,
which means no matter how far behind yourself is, and you don't doubt that it's behind,
you don't have to doubt that, or you have to know that behind still shares the, like,
the phenomenon of behind, still shares the same nature of the negative,
that we were talking about, so then you realize, well, it can be as behind as it wants to be,
it can never escape the nature of a negative, which means it's within the negative,
and that's how it's not assuming them, consequently, the existence of a self, independent of this
body and mind and so on, because it just, it becomes inconceivable. It seems to me kind of like
recognizing that for me is, in fact, an intention, kind of like any intention in a sense,
although a special character. You can't see it as, as an, as an actual sort of intention,
because it determines it involves you, but yeah, it is, it is like any other intention,
it's just the intention, the point set, the center. It seems also like so, as I was
assumed, it kind of bleeds in every other intention, like, I look at the cut, then I say,
that could be used for drinking for me, that could be thrown. You can say that that particular
intention ends up being superimposed over any other intention, or the entire plane of intentions here,
so that's exactly, it can appropriate anything. I was thinking also about that thing that
Nyanavira said, where the particular sins, things are mine, because I am, there it is, the
area sees properly, I am, because things are mine. We touched upon that briefly last time,
but I wanted to try and discuss it a little bit more at length. It's basically saying that
those positives, or somewhat positive indications are generated in this way, speaking, not like
emanating, but in terms of the structural feature of ignorance, by this denial by the negative
consciousness, and from then you take those indications, which are inter-overlaid over just the
normal of, you know, saying, oh, this is positive, this is negative, but then there's an assumption
superimposed, so say on them it says, oh, this indication of negative is the indication of
myself, which is the point of view. What I just spoke before this, basically because
there is that assumption of, for me, being behind, or independent of any other intention,
you end up assuming the fully-blown self-personality, complete independent of everything,
and the thing is, that is your starting point. You don't start with a corruption of consciousness,
and then the developing of the particular intention for me, that that's misunderstood,
the result in the sense of self. No, you start with the sense of self, so through the sense of self,
then you can start seeing these assumptions, mistaken notions. They're the real as such,
because ignorance doesn't have the manifested beginning whereby this is highly originated.
So although it's true, what you said, in one necessarily leads you to the required knowledge,
if it's not seen in the right order, and the right order is actually to start with a sense of self,
and then know that for as long as this sense of self, it's now present simultaneously exists,
means I'm taking things to be mine while this sense of self is present, it cannot be otherwise.
So you're not kind of reversing in the sense of an explanation, but more like,
that sense of self remains intact, but then your knowledge can go through it, while it's
still present, and then see that it actually requires things to be mine in order for, and then already
you stop regarding it as self, or certainly you regard it as less of a self, because now you
see what it's actually dependent upon something. It's not independent, extra temporal, changeless
self, as Daniel would call it. So then obviously the same discernment can go further than
you realize, well there is no mind, things don't arise beforehand on their own, so the four great
elements paid with consciousness, you know, their eyes unfold, they come and go, and that's it,
and you realize, and that's that whole thing, that whole movement, that whole phenomena is the
necessary prerequisite, the simultaneously present with for the appropriation of things,
for that notion of mind, which is then simultaneously present again. So you could say,
it's because of the appropriation of these things that arise randomly, there is self,
you don't have to necessarily talk about mind, but once you start looking at you realize,
yeah, it's a sort of a refined way of taking things to be self, you just regard it as mind,
but that's what precedes the sense of self. So it needs to be done in that order, and then
that which was taken to be itself, that which was the self, will become not the self,
but it might still be there, whatever that thing was, whatever that notion of self was,
whatever it was implied, stays, but ceases to be yours, because really you abandon the ownership,
only the ownership of that phenomena, you have not been negating or denying the whole phenomena,
or trying to reverse engineer or kind of re-explain it in more pleasing terms.
So it's true, because things are taken in mind, sense of self is this, but that can be seen
rightly, only through the existing sense of self. So basically, when let's say one is trying to do
mindful thinking, so to say, proper thinking, basically you're saying that one has to become,
let's say, reflexively aware of one's self first, within the situation, then everything starts
within the experiences of all exactly, and you can also, because sometimes, if mindfulness is not
developed properly, that sense of self remains kind of under a cloud, that sort of nature of an
extra temporal changeless, it's everywhere and nowhere, and you can't quite grasp it, who's
you're trying to grasp it, obviously, but if you're just mindful of the experiences of your situation,
and then no matter how big use that sense of self is, it can be designated as such. You
might not be able to grasp it as a fully actual thing, but you can certainly designate it as an
ambiguous sense, vague, vague remote sense of self, and that's enough, because if it was truly extra
temporal, change yourself, it exists outside of your experience, you could not conceive it,
you just could not talk about it, you couldn't think it, but the fact that you can do all those things
means no, it's very much within that experience, but then it presents itself as the owner who is
outside of it, and you believe that presentation, and that's a self-view, just the gratuitous belief
taking you in the face value of its presentation, I'm independent, but you are within the dependent
experience, so how can you be independent? And by not dwelling on that, how can you be independent
long enough, people end up assuming, or carrying on that assumption that there has been established,
just completely gratuitously, no reason for it, but the reason for it is not thinking about it
properly, enough ignorance, if you don't think about something after enough,
then you're ignoring it automatically, and that's why ignorance is the absolute first course.
I moved on from there kind of thinking about changing your movement,
I think most people assume that manifest things changing fine, whatever, but that, which is not
appearing, they take, oh this is the same, that's experiencing each one, but it's that each
positive conditions, each negative. Yeah, of course, that even that, which appears as not changing,
in your experience, well can only be known as such in relation to that, which is changing, which
means it's not independent over it, which means then there might be something else in relation to
that, that's even less changing, so then from that point of view, that which was unchangeable
is actually changing, just a slower rate, it's changing slower than other fast things around you,
and that's just how things work, is just when that, when that sort of confuses people into believing
off, this is, this is permanent because it's not changing as much as other things, but whether
it's changing, whether at a higher speed or a lower, it's changing very slowly, changes them there.
Yeah, this paragraph, I'm not reading the whole thing, I'm just kind of paraphrasing the
best it just means trying to understand up to Vadupadhana, the idea that we were just speaking about,
okay, the positive seems to emanate from some source unseen, one one thing that was confusing me
as I was reading through the note, was he mentions at one suit to where he talks about consciousness as
he arrived, arrived at the emperor, arrived at the emperor, remember that one?
I get caught up when we start saying like consciousness is doing things, like arrived at or
growing or other such terms, like I don't quite understand what is meant by that, you know what I mean?
Yeah, okay, so you could say like this, don't think about it, it's doing itself, think about it,
it's happening to it, so, I mean you could say that plants are growing by themselves,
it can still endures the notion of art, it's doing it by itself, but it's basically,
yeah, you put a sort of a block of butter in the sun and it will melt, that's all to it,
so once the certain conditions come along, something will happen to it, so when the action
are rooted in wholesome, consciousness arrives at merit, the action arrives at the merit,
that's what ends up being for it, or happening to it, as a result of the conditions,
I guess say, cardinizes a meritorious, yeah, it arrives at it, but it's not doing it, that's the
thing, that's why like the consciousness grows because there are direction of growth that they're pulling
it towards it, and then it's just growing because there is an opening for it, if that's not there,
if that opening is understood, then you won't grow anymore, much in that sense, like it's happening
because the conditions are there in whatever is positive, so that's why like, I would say like
our consciousness is out there with the matter, doesn't mean it's out there next to it, literally, as matter,
yeah, but it means it's actually, it's nature is closer to that, which you think is the nature of
matter, then it's the nature of what you think yourself is, because consciousness is always
assumed as the most personal thing, as the center of experience, to the point that scientists
in what it comes to file in the center of your consciousness, and things like that,
while all of those sort of silly things basically are the result of the view of that self-centred view,
of self-consciousness being the very kind of root of it, but if you're thinking about consciousness
in the same independent manner as you're thinking about the four great elements,
then things will make more sense, so it's on the level of the four great elements,
and they're just a rise when there is a footing for them, consciousness grows when there is an
opening for it, and so on, and then your experience as a whole is just a result of that,
and that's why the whole appropriation of it is completely unnecessary, that's when you're
really referred to the regarding things in mind and the sense of self as a parasite upon the
upon the structure that does not require it at all, and there's actually no room for appropriation
at all, literally, it cannot be there, but not knowing that you put it there, that's why you
are responsible for its existence, that's responsible for anything that happens in a kind of that
fully assumed existence, but again, it's important to recognize that that's your starting point,
because if you don't recognize that as a starting point, then you will say,
oh, this is not real, the reality of things is really pure, the reality of things is nibbana,
and our ignorance is just delusion, which is not real, but it is, there would be true statement,
if there was the discernible beginning for ignorance, if there was a first point,
before which things are not ignorant, then developing the next thing, I can say,
but it's not, whenever you look, however you look, whatever you look, you're going to look
with your ignorance, which means that is your starting point, that mistake, but because it's
a mistake, because it's not supposed to be there, that's why our handship is possible,
so nibbana is present in everyone's experience as possibility, as a possibility,
but not as the ultimate reality, that you sort of achieve just by denying your mistake,
because you deny your mistake, and that's a mistake, through your ignorance.
So it's beginning one's start with one's end of self is, in a sense,
starting with one's ignorance, and again, it's not that you find the way out of ignorance left,
or right from ignorance, or a ball would be a lot of knowledge, it's right through,
while ignorance is still present, that a cognition of I am, sense of self, and then through that,
you can abandon it. One thing I was, I guess you say, excited about, and I'll set the right term,
as I could always kind of not quite understood what some culture of a Nyanam meant,
and I go like, oh yeah, because there's a termination, there's conscience,
and whatever, but I kind of had an idea that I think connected, something I wanted to read,
can I read the passage? Yeah, so I wrote a Nyanam being the fundamental termination,
and that things must be present before anything else. It depends on the fact that there is
determination at all, or the term I made was like determinationism, not like determination,
but like... How would you explain, or rather how would you describe, than the nature of determinationism?
How would you describe it? What's the most fundamental sort of nature of it? What's in common to
every determinationism? There must be two things. Exactly. So it cannot be by itself,
and if it cannot be one, just me, it cannot be self, because that's what the nature of self is.
So that's why it's because there are already two,
means that nature of the termination is there, because there has to be two things simultaneously
present, and consciousness being the most fundamental, one of them, means requires the other one,
which is matter. So because consciousness cannot stay standalone, that's why it's sort of subordinate
to the nature of the termination, the nature of having two things bound together, and now
know them can be the first. Hence, samkara parcevina, that's how consciousness originates as
defined consciousness, because it's not the other thing. That's basically the conclusion that I
got to, like the fact that there is determinationism, thinking where it just works for me,
is why consciousness can be at all. Exactly. Otherwise, it just would be...
Well, entirely incomprehensible. You could reflect on it if there's only one thing present,
there's no reference point for it. So that's why even the nature of the self,
it's hard, it's an absolute contradiction. There can't be one.
Here are the ones like perceptions of unity to say are what keep the self alive.
Yeah, it's that, and you can't possibly conceive unity without having diversity.
That's then united. But then your point of view cannot be united with it, because if you
were, you wouldn't be aware of it. So consciousness is that sort of nature, just presence of consciousness
and non-consciousness, the two simultaneous things, means there's always a point of view,
which means you cannot be that thing you're having of you all. So that's why even if it's
witnessed the unity, you're not part of it. So if you truly become part of unity,
means you become completely unaware, but then what kind of notion of unity is that?
So you realize any notions of unity that you can have in your imagination will be fully
based upon diversity. Some mistakes might say, pure unawareness is something to look for.
Yeah, but even that, they can develop that notion only based on diversity, which means
well, it can't be the pure unity, because it's diversified. So it's just, it's a complete
contradiction. They can never be sort of semantic like that.
So I was quite happy to start getting an inkling of what that actually referred.
Yeah, that was cool.
No, it's quite important, because most of people, no matter, you know, some people might
press it far enough in terms of a kind of detail understanding, something might not go into so much
detail, but there's a matter. The point is most of them would assume, all of them would really
assume consciousness in one form or the other as that kind of internal mind,
and often it's hard to sort of pin it down or understand it or clarify so that you can actually
see, ah, actually, no, even that when I am passing in careless thinking regard of my consciousness,
or this, or rather just consciousness order the implies mind for most of the people.
Well, if you were to clarify it enough, then you'd stop doing him and that, and that was in one
of the letters in early, early letters, and you know, he mentioned that, and he they're talking
about consciousness, and he was, he was often called in salutaries and so on, and then in one
of the letters, he kind of realized, oh, actually, no, I think, I think, I think I've been fully kind of,
just, I picked it up from such or something, but I was assuming that consciousness is always me
as opposed to, or here as opposed to over there, but consciousness is on the level of the, you know,
the five aggregates, so to speak. So basically, then he realized that, oh, well, if I'm correcting,
what I just wrote, that means I might have kind of abandoned the view of my consciousness being
myself, and if you, that's true, that's very welcome, and then the next letter followed another
inside, and another inside, and another inside, so that's how you build it up.
Like, you just started making sense to him, basically. It wasn't like, something he took on faith,
and repeated, and repeated. No, no, because I guess some people could perhaps just take
something on faith, but whether you take it on faith, or whether you can approach it with sort of
critical reflection and so on, you have to arrive at the same point, which is to understand it,
so often people would, too lazy, mentally, to make the effort to understand things, they say,
I'm not that type, I'm kind of the faith type from Sada, I follow Sada, I said, okay, so what do you do
then? Are you still making it to understand through your faith? And then you realize most of them don't.
So whether it's faith, whether it's its intellectual understanding, it needs to be,
needs to lead you to the understanding of nature of things, so for the Anavira he was not faith,
for sure, he was basically just trying to understand it. It's like an insight, he was after
insight upon insight upon insight, I think we're getting clearer. I think for those people,
too, they kind of mix up the fact that even someone who is the wisdom type has to have
faith still. Oh yeah, of course, he had faith, he wouldn't have spent years trying to understand
that, because he had faith that that was right, but he wasn't sure until he understood it.
The point is it's not like you suddenly get the knowledge of everything and all at the same time,
so it's a buildup sort of overcoming and sort of fading out that assumption, just sort of
destroying it bit by bit by bit, weakening it, and then things become clear. And then once it's
clear, you can't revert back why, because well, you will never suppose to have this assumption,
so to speak. Experience did not require him, experience did not induce the assumptions,
experience was not responsible for any assumption at all in any shape of form.
What was responsible is you not understanding experience. Now that you have understood the experience,
result of that is cessation of assumptions. And now that you have understood it, you cannot
un-understand it and then bring back the assumptions. So the point is,
in the year, if you did the suitors, you'll see whatever different approach you want to
mindy-taken, it all leads to understanding. Full understanding, I think that's what makes
a moment full understanding, not some perfect adherence to this method or to that method or to this
mantra, no, it's full understanding. And you understand things when you fully know them, really,
there's other word to describe it. And that's why, as I said, it cannot be reverted back.
Yeah, I have to even admit that up until fairly recently, there was this thing being
a sudden notion of what you described as ignorance, as a mystical entity, as opposed to an active
thing. Yeah, it's an active passive ignoring, ignoring, sorry, ignoring the thing, that's it.
As I just said, five minutes ago, yeah, because you don't look at it often enough,
that's automatically a form of ignoring you. And pair that with following distractions of the
senses, adhering to the view because of the blaze you and so on. So then you kind of reinforce
the act of not looking at those things. So then you reinforce your ignorance.
Yeah, no, that was, that was very important. Like, I remember him when I kind of realized that
because yeah, everybody starts with assumption of ignorance is kind of buried deep down inside
and they're all this kind of hardened shell of habits and whatnot. And then you need to kind of
unravel it all and reach the source and sort of pull it out. No, it's the most,
it's the thing on top of like on the very surface of everything what you do. It's right there and
you carry it through all your life times. But it's because it's so close to your eyes basically,
you don't see, because I just always look beyond it and other things. That's why distraction takes
away from it. But when you look at it, it's really just a fully an active attitude. That's sort of
active in the sense you engage in it, but you can engage in it passively. There's literally
constitutes an active attitude. Exactly, that's what it maintains so easily. Yeah, flawless, flawless maintenance.
So using all these kinds of things you've been talking about, I think I understood more
one time, I think it may be like July, August, I brought you that suit there where it talks about
like feeling as a bubble, matter as a lump of foam, conscious magic show. So I went back to the
magic show one and I just wanted to share it with you, see what you think. In magic show,
always involves deception. A card trick, for example, relies on the viewer not seeing or being
ignorant of the hidden cards of the magician's sleep. The Buddha compares consciousness to a
magic show. The indication is generated by consciousness is denial and the positive,
but not understood, point to the self, so if we're imposed upon negative, rather than simply
pointing to a negative, necessary structural aspect, not seeing this and quote unquote,
elusions, realized such, of self as master, appears. This self can, in a sense,
and appear both positive and negatively, talked about that stuff. I can speak of myself as a
arisen phenomenon in some sense, but also is that behind the direction disclosed by consciousness.
Since this is all assumed as valid, self is then assumed to be independent of either
positive or negative, since it is assumed to be, can be both, or the experience of the whole,
because one set out to see that, wherever self may seem to go, positive, negative,
determine each other. So whichever location one assumes becomes a little point because they're
all undermined. It's just interesting how this one thought, and then that sort of comes around,
and I'm like, oh, yeah, about that one, you kind of, this thing, kind of makes sense of the deception.
Yeah, that's what it is. The figure that deception equals a parasite, in a sense, so it's not
something to be there, and things that are being sort of hidden like that deception,
and nothing to do with deception, they don't care about deception. It's the viewer who's
deceived. Things remain uninfected by it. Cards don't care, where they use the
for deception or not. They remain indifferent to it. In the same sense, the organism,
so there's a parasitic, they're not aware, it just doesn't affect them, it affects the viewer.
But as I said, that's the starting point because there is no first moment when that parasite
or that deception began. So because that's the starting point, it is really such.
Although that being is fully kind of given to it through that assumption, through that mistake,
through that deception, through that parasite, it is given as such, and it is real as such.
So only through admitting that it's real, you can go through it, so to speak. And then again,
it won't become unreal. It will basically become not mine. And when it becomes not mine,
then the main fuel of deception ceases, and then it's not real in a sense, it's not there anymore.
But when it's there, it's real. And that's important thing to recognize, when people say things
are not real, when people say things are not real, they fail to see that that requires those things
to be present there, in order for them to be designated as unreal. Right, I wrote a little
version in the credit code. Yeah, sure, sure. No, I don't think you think that, but I'm just saying
you have to be careful because you can still fall into like subtler assumption. Sure.
Of unreal, it's not unreal. No, it's unreal, and it's real as unreal deception.
So the mirage, the magic trick, it's real as such, and that's important thing. That's why it's hard
actually, and it's a good example. The people misunderstand, they use the example just to justify
if it's unreal, but they fail to see that you're witnessing a magic trick, and it's really such.
You can't pin it down because you don't understand it, and that's why it's real as a trick.
Once you understand it, once you see what he done, he pulled the car out of his sleeve,
the whole thing is now revealed. It's still the same thing, same performance, same everything,
but it's not a trick anymore because it has been understood. So the being of it as a trick has
ceased because it's seen. But yeah, see, that's already slightly subtler way to kind of understand
it then to just say, it's not real, what's real, it's what's behind the trick or something like that,
and that's how people who dismiss the whole experience often.
Okay, I see what you're saying. The hidden reality.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. So it's basically the same reality. It's your attitude to change the world,
the reality remains unaffected. The magician still continues to perform in the same trick,
and deceiving probably the rest of the audience, but you've seen through it.
Same, you're witnessing the exactly same things that you've been witnessing before,
but now your mind is not deceived in regard to it. Yeah, nothing has really changed,
and that's somebody who's fully understood the consciousness. He's not deceived anymore
in regard to everything that has stayed the same, and that's why people can't tell the
part externally, because everything can stay the same.
