But in a sense, basically, his strength was in the eye of the entire domain of the senses,
not just in a risk of his strength in regard to the unholy, in regard to sensual.
So it was like the similar debate that Sutta, where you completely shunned it.
You shun everything. You see the danger, but you can't stay within it in a careful manner.
So you run away, you can't be through the whole thing in a way.
And sooner or later, you have to come back to it.
That's like a people, like, it is strength, super-extraint.
And then just puff, give in, and then the damn breaks, and then just create worse mess than before.
So it's kind of oscillating, but there is no strength.
And in that talk, when I said, you know, like, say, like your senses, say a visual sense,
like a wild dog, they want to pull you out.
So sometimes, okay, by default, you resist the pull, but sometimes you can constantly be resisting the pull,
because it will weigh you down.
So then you have to pick your back out, whereby you resist the pull that is clearly unholy.
There is no negotiation there.
However, if that wild dog is pulling you through something that is neutral,
you have to be careful to let, like, not resist that.
Because it's easy to give in, and then no.
I said, no, to everything.
It's like what monks usually do, when they, or then, or something, they come,
and that's when they become neurotic.
No, no, no, Vinaya, Vinaya actually says the opposite.
Yes, but still.
No, no, no, but still, you have to allow for that space in between.
Like, the whole thing that we spoke before, like, putting the cloth down in women, which is actually not properly receiving the food.
And you can exactly see how it originated, was from a woman who might accidentally brush against your fingers when you were receiving it.
Nothing to do with you, and Vinaya says clearly, if that thing happens, it's not an offense.
But obviously, you know, a doubtful mind, well, a mind that is not developed in regard to doubt, will be overwhelmed by that doubt eventually.
So then you know, they really haven't done anything wrong.
The Vinaya says they haven't done anything wrong.
It was unintentional.
But you can't sleep at night.
Because basically you're caught in this neurotic kind of doubting paranoid sort of, whatever.
Spiling out of control.
So then what you do, then you make an exercise and you create your own rule, and to prevent even that from happening.
So no, I'll put a cloth down.
I'll put a cloth.
So then the woman can't touch me when she enters.
Yeah, but being touched, except it's not a problem.
So if that is bothering you, you should deal with that on that phenomenological level, not like of a level of running away and imposing another rule on top of a rule.
And that rule is unnecessary.
More certainly, like it can be irrelevant, sure.
Yeah, you use a cloth or whatever.
But like in this case, for example, it actually goes against the Vinaya rule.
So because you're a neurosis, Vinaya became inadequate for you and you need more.
And that is exactly what happens in most of the core work.
In the sense of seeing a wild dog that's pulling me out, that's not a problem.
The problem is when he ends up in an unwholesome state and then I have to suffer and I can't do it.
It's still the same wild dog.
Never was mine, never can be mine.
So then you just basically foresee the unwholesome scenarios where that dog will go and you prevent that and then let it go.
And then the dog will eventually come down as well.
But you mustn't go around just saying no to everything you see, everything you hear, everything you might doubt because you might doubt everything.
Because that's going to be a very tight and unpleasant state.
And it is always.
It's an exception.
So people do suffer and can't do it. And then even you say you have to avoid unwholesome.
Don't necessarily worry about wholesome.
It's quite hard for them to allow that because everyone means taking up responsibility for the distinction.
Okay, so now I have to rely on my own criteria that this is unwholesome and this is wholesome.
There is no external authority, there is an external community, external ministry, external Vinaya, external debt.
That's kind of beforehand, but now I actually need to draw a line between good and between the bad and then stay behind that line.
And that's basically very hard thing to do.
But if a person does that, then they truly go beyond silver bath parmasks and silver bath parmasks as I'm sure I said before.
It's somewhat people come and think, right, it's a ritual to ridicule it, bowing to a gold-gilded shrine or something. No, it's holding to a virtue and duty.
And that isn't quite a serious thing.
As things that will actually free you.
Exactly. As things that they find themselves.
Directly resulting in liberating material.
Basically, you believe that your virtue and duty are directly easy to demand.
You want? It doesn't.
You couldn't.
It can enable you to draw a line. The line I was talking about.
And when you draw that line, then virtue and duty, as you have adopted before and it had to be there where you have adopted before and.
But once you draw a line, once you go to the criteria for that line, it falls away as virtue, as duty.
That's why he is beyond silver, so to plan and then eventually around.
That's why it's hard for people to draw that line because it relies on their own judgment.
There is no safety of tradition, safety of the history, the order of everything.
It's just you, basically, sticking behind what you chose to do.
Obviously, you won't be able to wholesome me or rather rightly draw that line. If you haven't been adopting even externally these rights and rituals or are the virtue and duty, the norms.
But you must certainly not stay there because then, yeah, then you would be like, you know, a 50, 50 last month who is still as neurotic about his rule as on the first day and still not in the sort of manner.
But there's clearly going beyond sealer means going deeper.
Yeah, going beyond sealer means basically not depending on it, but not breaking it either.
What being unable to break it, to an extent, obviously.
Because, you know, that sealer is also defined in regard to, where else is sealer?
I mean, like, all the necessary little, all the little circumstantial denial rules.
I talk about the basic principle of, you know, solubacy, lying, stealing, things that are in themselves and wholesome.
So that is the important bit because obviously, you know, virtue is important, but then people take it and then, even after, you know,
the knowledge they might have gained to suit us or whatever, they're still unable to let go because they don't know the truth or are they feared if they let go,
I mean, they were the opposite of non-sealer.
And that can happen if that sealer hasn't been established beforehand.
So there is actually, you have to, basically, it's like building up a ship, developing sales, you know, gathering all the information about the design and engineering it and then doing the whole thing,
never putting it into water and trying it out, never, never like setting it to go to see if it's going to sink.
So start singing quickly, pull it back, repair it, but you have to cross the other shore, not remain on this, clutching onto your little boat.
Because what's the use of the boat, if you don't actually use it to sail away, into the same thing.
So in terms of the food, that's like the, that's a quite good idea.
You've seen that yourself, probably experienced it yourself in the monasteries, how people like, like, so, okay, I have to eat.
So it's not like, you know, sexual intercourse or other unwholesome things that you don't have to do, you shouldn't.
But the food I have to eat, and then, obviously, you always have preferences.
Like, the mouth, your tongue, the sense of taste as an independent animal is an independent animal.
It prefers things, it wants things, it doesn't want certain other things.
And that is kind of evolved, completely circumstantially.
Based on the stuff you, when you were eating, you developed taste for certain things, you got sick of some other taste, that's it.
But obviously, for good to general, it's inseparable from the sense of self.
So then when someone says, okay, you need to eat carefully.
The other side you have to eat, but you have to eat carefully.
Like, it's your last, you know, kid your child, you need it just for survival.
So, yeah, that is true.
That's what you need to have. I eat food purely so this body will still be alive so that I can practice.
But over there, as it said, you need to be obsessed with a bunch of preferences.
Or, certainly, try to avoid it.
So you have people who get so mind-up, neurotic about eating food that they like.
Because I can't be mindful, basically, if the food I'm eating is the food I like.
It's impossible. But actually, it isn't.
Mindfulness is nothing to do with whether what you're eating is what you prefer or what you don't prefer.
Mindfulness is actually indifferent to your preference, which is why it's the mindfulness that needs to be practiced.
It's not just the opposite preference.
Because I remember I met people who would just intentionally take opposite of what they really want to take.
And it's like, well, the whole purpose of that is only to avoid responsibility for what you've taken.
There's no mindfulness involved.
So just you feel responsible if you take what you want to take.
So you think you avoid that responsibility by then taking what you don't want to take.
But you don't see that you're responsible for that now.
Because you can't avoid your responsibility by choosing a particular choice.
So you realize, why did I choose correctly for or what I don't?
I am affected by the at-choice of choosing food.
Even if I write down an impersonal algorithm that calculates for me what number of dishes to take on one day,
I have basically chosen the algorithm to be that which can give me the food to eat.
That's absolutely responsible for it.
Either way, when you rely on an external thing, an external, like an algorithm, or external written law,
or somebody who has said, externally said, you will not be aware internally of your responsibility for your choices,
which means you won't be mindful properly.
So then you realize, you don't actually have to fear your preferences.
You have to fear losing mindfulness in regard to that.
Or in regard to anything.
That's when that issue is set in.
That's when a video gets rekindled and so on.
Not when you eat your favorite fruit.
Because I want to get rid of my attachment towards fruit.
Exactly.
But they identify their attachment with their preference.
But it's not preference is a preference of your taste.
And your taste is not yours actually.
That animal is independent of you.
Always dragging around for so long, then you just,
but you're inseparable from it in your mind.
But even then, your preference is not your attachment.
It's ignorance.
In regard to preferences, then you're attached right there.
And that's the thing, because people in the course of their life
got so used to eating food that you prefer means eating it unmindfully,
are rarely lustfully.
Thus, now preference means that.
So I must avoid preference.
I must deny.
I must stop eating altogether as I were up into two giants.
You could see the revolt, the rebellion of the mind against the preference
or the choice.
But the white completely opposite way within the same domain of choice.
So then they just started choosing the opposite.
And more and more bizarre.
So, oh, I will eat every second day.
No.
Then I will eat every third day.
When that becomes not enough, I will eat every third day
from every fourth person,
on every third junction of the second town.
It's just completely randomly balanced.
And only rice.
And only rice.
And then when that basically sees to induce novelty of the restraint.
And you finally just told us before.
Exactly what you do.
Then you just go further.
And then I will stop eating all together.
And that's the highest demand.
It's not.
You never was.
And that's what the Buddha said.
He was slightly in a different relation.
The different question.
When he asked me, why do you think that my disciples respect me?
He said, well, because you eat little and you praise it in little.
You live under a tree.
He said, no, that's not true.
I sometimes eat a bowl full of food up to the brim of the back.
It's soft.
It's nice.
And then I have another bowl full of food.
So he had two arms, both.
So he finishes with four arms, both of food.
And then they ask him, oh Lord, enjoy.
He said, yeah, sure.
Fill it up again.
And he eats it.
And while at the same time he has disciples who get food every second day or something.
And it's a very coarse and horrible food.
And they live to cover you like a hemp throbes and under element of tree.
So if they were to respect him on a kind of...
With nothing behavior, they wouldn't.
Yet they had the utmost respect for it.
Why?
Because the devil is...
Well, it's it beyond that as well.
And they know it.
And they know it because of his teaching thus, the respect is unshakable.
Even if the Buddha just spends the rest of his days living in King's Palace as an eating all the time.
Makes no difference.
Because if you're trying to adjust your food to adjust your mind.
You're taking it from the wrong end.
Yeah, taking it from the wrong end.
You're trying to solve the problem from the wrong end.
Or just mix your food in the bowl.
I told you I was doing that because people were talking about it.
And I didn't mind to begin with it.
But I did find it quite amusing.
I did it on the second day of mixing everything.
Fish, fruit yogurt, grapes and stuff.
I started developing tastes for certain mixes.
I started to like fish with grapes.
Or with my mouth, it's full of all sorts of fruit, curry, rice and ice cream.
Whatever was melted over.
My mind, again, if you eat it mindfully, if you relax.
You might get focused on the pit of the mouth.
That is in contact with the taste that you like.
So there is no end to that separation of your preference.
Well, not preference of choice, basically.
Of what you want, what you like.
Because you can't do that mechanically.
Because the mind, in the sense, will always pick on that.
Even if you give it.
And then if you just eat what you don't want.
Within that, you'll start preferring things.
Like, what should this life less?
So there's completely from the wrong end.
What you need to do is eat mindfully whatever comes your way.
So then, if you do need a criteria for, okay, but still, what should I eat?
Because you know, I'm in a shop as a layman, perhaps,
who keeps the free subs.
I mean, I'm in a supermarket.
I don't want to buy.
So what criteria?
You use criteria, okay, why do you eat?
Why would I say it should be?
To be healthy.
So you can practice.
So then, choose the healthy food.
So there is really horrible tasting healthy food.
And there is something I really crave about.
Well, either way, choose what's cheaper.
Or choose something in between.
Or choose what you like for making a point
to not lose the mindfulness while you're eating that which you like.
Because if your mindfulness becomes unshakable
in regard to a harmless preference of foods,
it's nothing unwholesome about preferring a watermelon
or a mango is a step preference.
That does not induce lust.
It's ignorance in regard to it.
It's ignorance in regard to the preferred object
that provides you with pleasure.
That's what induces lust.
But beautiful objects, tasty objects,
nice sounds.
One of that is actual lust, and it was quite clear on that.
So choose whatever you want to choose for whatever reasons
because that's beside the point.
The point is eat it mindfully when you eat it
and be mindful of the feeling of eating it.
And never compromise with that.
So soon enough, you won't take long
if you really commit to that sort of practice.
You will basically just not care what you eat.
Because you realize there was never a point.
Or like never, never that relates to the problem.
It was mindfulness in regard to it.
It was basically appropriating the domain of the taste
when you're following the food.
Like, entertaining the notion
that you are actually consuming that food.
But when that food disappears down on your throat
when you swallow it, it's in you.
But it's not that food.
When it's in your stomach, it's as external as it was
when it was out on the shelf in the shop.
Which means your stomach, then,
cannot be appropriated.
It means the whole domain of your body, then, remains external to you.
And that's what your mindfulness gets established upon.
And that means you basically just stepped outside
of the whole domain of centrality.
The centrality, the domain, whereby pleasure,
that pertains to senses, can pull you.
But being by stepping outside, they can't pull you anymore.
So the whole of preference is remained.
But none of them is used any last anymore.
Why? Because you're not there.
You can't be affected by it.
There is mindfulness of that situation.
Yeah, well, having your mindfulness established,
having your mind composed, in regard to that,
well, in regard to the right extent of that phenomenon
of the body, this body here and now.
Because most people think, like, you know,
I mean, your skin is inside.
And, you know, your lungs are inside,
your stomach is your mouth is kind of inside.
And then inside inevitably has that, like, personal connotations.
It's, like, in a mind.
And that's why, for an art hand, that kind of internal
disappears.
So to speak, something that's used in suit
is different internal external.
But when the Buddha says, what is left,
it's this conscious body.
I out there, this conscious lamp of flesh
in the world, externally.
And the naming matter, external.
So whichever way he looks,
internally externally, basically, he sees external
and slightly less external, but still external,
I, not mine.
That's what I mean by internally,
and it needs to be clarified.
Because internally is taken as my internal dear.
Suffering arises, like, you know, the true dukkha.
The pure dukkha arises internally.
In that, like, sense of mind,
you're affected by it.
Yeah, exactly.
The mind, as it goes, is inside.
And you're able, well, okay,
it's inside in relation to what you see from your senses,
but all of it, as a whole, it's outside.
And here, yonder, yonder,
and here, as in inside, are all out there.
Here's also sort of strange practices
up here.
Well, the yeast, we've tried to get, you know,
the suffering of God's food,
regard to your desires,
and so you create a new food.
You blame the food, or you,
you basically, you're so caught up,
in the desire around the food,
you end up just thinking about food all the time.
Yeah, trying to get beyond,
denying food, trying to replace the food.
Yeah, something else.
And one thing that some people like to
replace with is breathing,
breath aerials.
Well, I have a bone there.
Yes, that's another interesting.
Well, what's the difference then?
Because then, will you just take your breath?
As personal mind, you can't.
And you depend on it.
You have, there is, the body is dependent on a nutrient.
Yeah.
And do you, to say that it's a game?
It's an illusion.
Right.
Well, no, that doesn't make sense.
It's an illusion.
Yeah.
And then, but breathing just air to nourish the body.
Maybe some people can get better at the game.
But that's what, that's what I mean.
Why would you stop there then?
If you deny food, why don't you start denying breath?
Which is what people did.
Which is what the Buddha tried to do.
Yes, stop breathing.
And then you realize, no, this is a completely wrong way.
You will never reach,
well, freedom and liberation by doing that.
So what do you think? You know, imagine.
I mean, imagine the hardcore ascetic
on a brink of death all the time, basically.
Has already, you know,
his close friends in the world were the same.
And at the same rate.
And then he goes off and eats this milk rice
given to him by a woman.
Just, and he eats this bowl of
probably quite delicious, basically healthy, fatty milk rice
and they sing dirty.
And it's over.
What's he took two oranges?
Where is your restraint?
He ate the milk rice
as a form ascetic.
And he realized, actually, you know,
it's going to be waste of time.
You have to go the other way.
Yeah, because it's not waste of time.
No, not waste of time.
He's just like a reaction in regard to it.
And that's what it's,
a similar debate,
imagine an entire debate.
And that's what it's done.
That's what it says.
The first, basically,
traps and controls by Mara.
He doesn't understand some.
Other, we'll actually see that.
And they were like, oh, look, Mara is actually there.
And he traps people.
And that is bad.
So what they do,
they debate completely,
deny it, and they run away from it.
Into the mind.
When there is no debate,
there is no Mara, there is nothing.
Because, basically, if you don't eat food,
you will not be bothered by preferences,
and you go to food.
So just throw the whole thing.
But you can't sustain that.
And the Buddha himself said that so many times.
Which means, then,
that hurt eventually,
when there isn't anything left in those margins,
where the debate is set, and they, again,
eat in amwarely, and on account of that,
Mara does what he wants.
Then the third, the third,
sees the first group, sees the second group,
and then realizes, well,
what if we stay within the debate?
But he didn't worry.
And then, always,
we'll step ahead and say, well,
then they start arguing or reviews.
They might be living withdrawn from Centralite.
They start arguing or reviews,
and they find that, then the fourth era
doesn't even argue or reviews.
But at the principle of Centralite,
it's basically staying within the debate,
because you have no choice really.
And by shunning the debate, you give power to the debate.
So stay within the debate,
but never, ever eating it unwarely.
So, literally, imagine,
the further rest of your life,
whatever food you put in your mouth,
will have potential to have a hook in it.
But you have to eat it.
So every, every most sort of food that comes to you,
will have a debate hidden inside it
for the rest of your life.
Or, have a possibility of having a base.
You don't quite know. You can only have foods.
So how would you eat that food?
Very carefully.
For the rest of your life.
So you have to put it in your mouth,
piece by piece,
bit by bit. Don't let it all around you.
Don't lose mindfulness.
It's just bite in it,
because it will rip your mouth.
And then, oh, there is a debate,
but you haven't been eating like a maniac,
carelessly.
So you can feel it. You can pull it out
without actually arming yourself.
You can eat the rest.
And the further rest of your life,
in regard to everything you put in your mouth.
And that's all it says, basically.
And that, that's similar,
of course, in the desert.
That's exactly what it says.
So you really have to eat.
Okay, well, we have to kill this child,
it's a lie by the way.
But at least it will give us a chance to survive.
And maybe have some more children.
And they may commit this children.
Whatever it is, it's always best of the horrible scenario.
So you might quite like that child.
I mean, the taste of it.
If you start eating.
Yeah, because you need a starving,
fried meat.
No, no, no, no.
You still have to eat it.
So how do you eat it?
You need to care for it.
Don't forget it's your only child that you just killed,
in order to survive.
Which means you won't forget the purpose why you eat it.
Which means you won't get careless.
And certainly, you want results to food
for mere central pleasure.
You need them.
Then you want a problem eating once a day.
It's, it's also seen as a food you see.
A something which will bring,
will give you some sort of experience.
Oh, I know it's a good experience.
That's a completely different thing.
I know what you mean.
But they're just a whole new level of wrong.
It's not being worth addressing it.
Yeah, it's just that it's such a,
it's a very common and normal thing
for most people.
It's just food is a nice thing.
Yeah.
And they just enjoy it together.
Yeah.
They just have this taste.
Yeah.
But that's, that those are people that don't even have a concept of what the practice will,
if any kind of this trend would be,
they're just completely forgotten.
You know, they're the first hurt.
It doesn't even recognize that it's actually been trapped.
It's not even completely in control,
but they don't even recognize it.
So, nothing you say to them.
We'll change that and I'll ask them themselves.
That's it.
Right.
I mean, for goodness sake, people go as far as to...
mystify the food, Christians,
Christians.
Good grief.
I go, you believe, oh yeah, this, this,
this fried up
loaf of bread, whatever I'm eating,
I was given to it.
I go, directly, by God.
This is the, the gods.
Paul, they are meeting.
Increation, through devotion,
if I remember correctly, it's been ages ago.
When I, when I had a friend,
in Krishna, with God for his lunches.
Yeah, we were going there for the food, really.
This is a nice food.
And he was a nice guy.
But I was really interested in whatever he's saying.
So, he just put up with it.
So, you can eat.
But, I don't remember.
I remember basically the whole, the whole idea was
this, this, like, the more you eat,
the more of a, like, a, a, a, a, a,
a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
a, a, a, a, a, a,
a, a, a, a, a, a,
a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
a, a, a, a, a, a, a
a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
a, a, a, a, a, a, a, aIf
da, a Aboriginalphot,
a, a, l, a, a, a,
a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
Supplements, that's not a issue.
Only if you think this may be, you'll be, you know, you have last full thoughts.
Well, you have last full thoughts, because you have last full body.
I think this may be my reminder of that.
And if you're not developed, you're regarded, then it may be me.
You just need to have reproductive organs.
That's it.
So, yeah, blaming the specific food, you know, don't need those foods.
I mean, I'm not talking from the health perspective.
I'm talking from the spiritual perspective.
And for those people, you know, that's why I often spit it out.
It is linked with health.
With yogis or whatever else.
You know, I help the food, my spirit is helpful.
Good luck with that.
What you're going to do when your body gets sick, because it's all right.
And you hold your whole life a spiritual development.
And bodily pushes and stuff.
Gone.
All your attainment is dependent on your healthy body.
Yeah, and that's not an attainment.
And that's my favourite one.
Not even that.
Not even people who are right, young.
Yeah.
So...
No, it's a completely misplacement.
And it's easy, easy for people to do, because obviously...
The pure number, the real number is that it's so hard, subtle to understand.
I mean, do you see how many people could just travel,
cross the idea of being mindful of an arisen thing?
Like, without resorting to some sort of, you know, scientific explanation,
or say, I was constantly, you know, just be mindful of an arisen thing.
Be mindful of the enduring arisen thing, arisen thing that endures.
And the confusion is already set.
So if it's the same thing, like five seconds ago, and the thing now,
well, that's not the same, but it is the same thing.
But it isn't, because it was five seconds.
So there is a change.
We did that same thing.
But it's still the same thing, because you're still talking about it as a same thing.
That's changing in a different level.
And that's already mind-blowing.
For most of people.
I think that's quite normal back in the day.
That kind of authentic sort of recognition of...
You know, they didn't think they were in time.
They didn't think time was constantly changing.
And everything is in the flux.
They had no notion, such as those.
So the human are done with something's first time, and they were before, even immediately,
land.
It didn't make sense.
Because they didn't have so many wrong reviews coming together.
Now there's other cases.
With food, knowing that, or knowing that the body means nutrient,
and contemplating that, that can be a huge point.
Yeah, depending on the term.
And that's our secondary.
And for your concern should be mindful in regard to the need for the food.
Basically, everything you put in your mouth, as it might have a sharp fish bonnet,
or something that if you buy it will break your tooth.
And you will be unable to eat it carefully.
If you cultivate that actually.
And you will become unable to descend down into your belly as yours.
And regard it as internal need.
Which means you will stop going down into the center of the maze.
Where those pleasures can exercise power is over here.
We say it's more powerful food.
Or sex.
Well, sex would be more powerful.
But food would be more fundamental.
If you're hungry, you won't have thought of sex.
In that sense, food is more fundamental.
But the pool of food, you know, you're hungry.
It will never be as feverish and crazy as pool of sex.
A pool of sex is just a combination of all the pools.
Yeah, exactly.
All of the animals are pulling in.
So all of the senses are intoxicated by the sexual desire.
As you know, in your opinion, you're good to know.
In a single form, then a form of man, the sets of mind of a woman,
and a form of all the sense of mind of a man.
And then those little sights, sounds, mouth, face, touch,
as that of a man for a woman and a woman for a man.
So basically, yeah, you have all five pools going for it.
Food is fundamental, which is why, obviously,
it's completely unnecessary to be done at all,
and it shouldn't be done at all.
While the food you have, you know, you have to eat and engage with it,
but then you have to sort of start separating.
You know, eating the stuff around the bed, not with the bed.
Give yourself to be mindful then of the...
You can't.
There's no mindfulness here to recognize mindfulness
as an arisen, established thing.
It's impossible to have that.
And the sexual desire, what?
Sexual pool that you get, it suggests that you engage at the same time.
And that's what the Buddha meant when he said,
it's impossible to engage in a sexual intercourse
without being held by the central perceptions.
Without your mind being held by that.
It's impossible to not perceive sensuality
and engage in the actual act of sensuality
because that act is defined by the perceived sensuality.
But non-mindfulness.
Well, of course, yeah.
Yeah.
The non-developed mind.
Yeah.
So you can know, you could try,
I mean, obviously, persons having sex,
they can really be in a present moment.
Well, you're always in a present moment.
You're always in a present moment?
With it, but it means nothing.
They don't even know what a present moment is there.
Yeah.
Which is when people practice being in the present moment.
Just going with it.
There's nothing wrong with being in the past moment.
The future moment.
But what if you're mindful of it?
The person who enables you strengthen your mind
with mindfulness,
or, let's say, strengthen your mind.
You have a mindfulness.
And you've got food.
There will...
Well, sexual...
No, no, no, no.
First, by not engaging in any form of sexual intercourse or activity.
And then being mindful in regard to the food,
then that can lead you out of the central,
central domain,
or rather have your mind established above central domain.
But you can be mindful as much as you want around the food
if you spend your day engaging in sexual thoughts
and kind of cultivating and detaining those,
you won't work.
So that's why it doesn't need to be abandoned.
You have to stop engaging in it beforehand
and then you can start developing the practice within that.
Hence, the awareness here comes first.
Because both are single-game.
You have a hungry stomach.
And then basically demanding senses, demanding food pleasure.
Well, in this case, obviously,
senses demanding food because they're hungry.
And basically,
attending to their hunger by eating,
provides you with pleasure.
Even if it's not necessarily food that you prefer.
So that's already...
If you're not mindful, that's already a hook, that's already a belt.
That's what I mean.
Like you can try running away from your preferences for as much as you want.
But that's beside the point.
The point is that you may mindful through and through.
But you eat whether you prefer it or not.
Why? Because even the food that you don't prefer.
When you are hungry,
it will provide you with simple pleasure of being food for your hungry stomach.
And that pleasure, it can be essential pleasure if you are hungry and you got it.
Doesn't matter if the food you put in your mouth is agreeable or not.
Because both have or might have a belt.
It doesn't say that only food that you prefer has a belt.
And you should avoid it.
No, does it say food that you hate hasn't been known?
It says food has a belt.
Food might be a belt.
So that's why actually preference or not is completely seconded thing.
Once you've been rooted in practice,
you've been rooted in the mindfulness.
And then there would have been preferences.
They were based on other preferences.
They were completely based on just pure pleasure.
These are the pleasure.
And they will fall off.
Because now all of them require that attitude of non-mindfulness at the very root.
But once you start out with the other preferences won't necessarily fall off.
You can still tell now this is a nice food.
That was not so nice food.
That was quite rough.
Oh, the food smells really bad.
I even have a gag reflex.
But that's nothing to do with just the fact.
This is about how those hardest animals respond to it.
But if you eat it unmindful, even the most horrible food in the world,
you still remain as a probably even more enslaved because you think you're not enslaved
by avoiding preference, preferred food.
Well, actually, you remain even like equally enslaved by thinking you're less enslaved
while that adds another layer of slavery to it.
That you yourself create it.
And that's why you do have those extreme ascetics who eat feces or who knows what.
Just horrible, horrible stuff.
And there wouldn't be only one who has a brilliant new day of life.
Probably even worse.
So, yeah, I mean to be dispassionate towards food.
It's not because food tastes bad, not because it's horrible food,
but because it's there.
Because Mara might have placed the bait in it.
The bait has nothing to do with agreeable or disagreeable food.
It has to do with Mara.
It's in food.
So, as I said, you don't actually have to have the food, you have to eat.
So, then you do, okay, so I just have to eat this food.
So, then I'll just take great care to avoid falling and biting and chewing into the bait.
And that's it.
And that's the body's business, food.
Yeah, yeah, that's not your business, really.
Which you have to, you know, tend to every day, every day.
So, means every day you need to be mindful of the bait.
Every day you need to be mindful of the trap and the snare.
And then, yeah, oh yeah, so the practice is basically about every day mindfulness.
And the repetitive drilling.
Food is quite a burden, isn't it?
It's burdensome.
Well, no, Mara is a burden.
Because he's relentless in having that big place in the food.
So, but again, he has everything right to do so.
Because the food belongs to him.
The food, the taste, and the tongue belongs to him.
The sights and eyes belong to him.
The sound and ears belong to him.
You remember this, because it's because people take that which belongs to Mara.
Mara does what he wants, well, with them, but I can't have it.
And what is that he takes?
It's the eye and the sights.
It's the ear and the sound.
It's the nose and the smells.
So, you know, it's the same your senses, actually, belong to him.
So, it's every right to put whatever he wants in it.
And it's you who keep biting carelessly.
And then, hooking yourself like a mindless fish.
And that's the deal.
That's what some sorry is.
That's what an existence is.
A person can complain about it, feel sorry for himself, but that's just how it is.
And you would complain about it, feel sorry, because you're still refusing to give up your ownership of those things.
I still feel entitled to your eyes and to the sights.
Like that was the first.
I can't wait for you.
