But can you clarify for me what is this Chittanimeda?
No, it seems quite an important term to understand the sign of your mind, so clarify it for me please.
Well, think of it as we spoke before.
For a round train mind, the attention goes onto something and it's kind of fully absorbed by that.
Even if they practice a degree of reflection, they step back from it.
What is step back into becomes a new actual thing, which means they remain non-discerning the peripheral, the general, the negative in regards to that obviously positive thing that's present.
Be it a feeling, a thought, sight, sound, mouth, taste, touch, anything that cannot be taken.
Your attention determines if it's going to be actual or they will be peripheral, recognizing in regard to it.
So the mind is the sign on the basis of peripheral.
So if you start the sign in the peripheral on the basis of arisen things, then eventually you start recognizing that on that peripheral is what the mind is.
That's what Chittanimeda is.
I can't roll.
Yeah, I know, so I'm going back to it obviously. It's not like...
I mean, give us this answer and that's it. So the point is to see that feelings and perceptions, all these things, if you were to see the simultaneously present,
well, if you were to feel feelings, simultaneously present and perceive perceptions, simultaneously with the feelings that are being felt,
that will already, that can only be done, that can only be discerned on the basis of mind, discerning the peripheral in regard to the actual arisen and more particular things.
So does that make sense?
Need more, I need more.
So in other ways, you don't even know how to feel until you become mindful.
Does that make sense?
No, it makes you less.
So for a mind that is not developed in mindfulness, basically there's just another one you can say for a mind that is not developed.
That mind, that person, that Tujana, he can't feel properly, he doesn't know what feelings are, because he doesn't understand what is feelings.
He doesn't know how to feel.
And you can see that often the way people speak about feelings, they would use a designation that can only be a part of perceptions.
But even if they don't know what they know, they cannot distinguish between perception and feelings, they feel and they perceive.
Well, yeah, sure.
They feel that they perceive in terms of obviously the aggregates are there.
There is no feeling there, but they don't know how to feel.
Which means they're just fully and always constantly liable to feeling while its nature remains completely obscured from them.
That's what the Buddha said, my teaching is for the one who feels.
Not the one who is sort of touchy touchy and hugging trees and sort of universal love.
No, the one who actually recommends the phenomenon of feelings is being present.
And you would see that every feeling in that sense, if you're mindful, you would see that every feeling basically pertains to the mind.
Every feeling is chetastic in that sense, every feeling is mental.
So in that sense, every feeling becomes almost like every feeling becomes peripheral, so to speak.
Even because if you look at the actual feeling, what you're feeling, what you're expecting to find in the sphere of actual is that which you perceive.
So then you usually start associating feeling with heat in your body or with pain in your elbow or something like that.
But that's what goes together.
The simultaneous present, they're inseparable. You can't even conceive them apart, but that's what the feeling is.
And that's why, because people have no basis of proper mindfulness, they have no basis of knowing how to feel.
Yes.
How to recognize the feeling.
So they cannot, in their perception, recognize that there is actually a feeling present.
Because that's peripheral in regard to the actual perception they're staring at.
Yes.
So where you can start to recognize it.
Yeah.
That which you start to recognize, that's the basically beginning sort of to discern the signs of your mind.
The signs of the phenomenon of the mind, which is perception, determining upon the presence of simultaneous presence of perception and feeling.
So simultaneously present perception, simultaneously present feeling, that experience as a whole is what the sign of the mind, what the mind is.
So getting the sign of the mind is kind of a precursor to fully becoming established in the phenomenon of mind.
So do you mean, can it be something like that?
You know, you are engaged with some particular being aware of this or that.
But peripherally, you are aware of your, of this, like, that whole concept of your body.
You are talking for it yesterday, but also that there is a mind present, which is the feeling and perception.
Well, no, no, no, that would be an extra.
I honestly already done layer.
If you are mindful of the general in regard to particular, that experience is the experience of the mind that is mindful.
Then if that's what the mind is.
So the mind is this mindfulness?
Well, the mind is revealed by that mindfulness.
Let me, let me think about it.
So the mind is this better or is the whole thing?
Well, I think for the practice purpose, you can, it will probably be more helpful to think of it as peripheral.
The mind is found in the phenomenon of the peripheral.
Why? Because anything that is actual has a reason on the basis of the peripheral.
Yes.
And then it thinks that to make sense.
Because the mind is precursor of all things.
And so you realize that what has a reason particularly in your perception is only intelligible and discern the such,
because the mind was already there very early.
But at the same time, if the matter of the particular perception was not there, the mind as the field would have not been defined.
Yes, the goal is necessary.
Of course.
Yes, sir.
In other words, it would just be mind existing, but mind cannot exist in its own.
Oh, you can say mind and body. That's fine.
It's not exactly.
But mind and body are very thorough.
Sorry?
Mind and body are very thorough.
No, see, that's the thing.
What is peripheral is only regard to what you are attending to.
So body is not always peripheral.
If you are attending to your body, then the body is actual. Then something else is peripheral.
It's not a fixed thing.
That's why it's hard to see it because it's determined by what you attend.
Not by what you hold to be.
I see.
That's what holding onto views.
Yes.
Like if you get the right view, it will keep redirecting you back to the right point.
If you don't have the right view, it takes you completely away.
Yes.
Just for that very reason.
Yet, inevitably, the way we are sort of formed, the far upgrades, you give priority to that view.
That's being held.
And you can't not hold views because that becomes another view.
You hold.
So actually, what is peripheral depends on what you attend.
That's an actual.
So if you attend your body present in this situation, in this room seated,
what's peripheral in regard to that, you can call the mind.
But you will see that the mind becomes negative.
The mind doesn't appear in the indirect sense.
But say while you are seated, then you start using your hands picking up the cup.
But now, that general body that is present becomes peripheral to this particular engagement.
Yes.
With the body.
Which means now, the mind is where that body is.
That general, not the particular one.
So that's why basically the mind is inseparable from it.
And in the same sense, that's why if you were to liberate that mind, that general mind,
from any liability to feelings, wrong views, wrong assumptions, then it becomes intimate.
Because that peripheral is this only.
Just goes.
And for right view, you need to start getting the notions of that peripheral.
I, the signs of your mind, check to know if there is a condition for arising of the right view.
For the same reason, it is like the previous though, when I was talking about samadhi.
That's why samadhi develops mind.
Develops the same principle.
The composer of mindfulness results in mind development.
It's the expanding of the recognition of the peripheral in regard to the action.
