I thought just to ask some thanks which I find the suitors relating to stages of Ayyapugala
and also inside elements like eight emaciations.
So I will read it later on.
So I'm referring to the suitors and we'll turn on the Kaya 4 suitors which are suitors
by the 7 to 90 and that's in those suitors who are talking about 4 kinds of persons found
existing in the world and he categorized those 4 people, those 4 persons, one is the ascetic
and shaken, second is the white lotus ascetic, third one the red lotus ascetic and the fourth
one the delicate ascetic among ascetics, so basically it's just referring to Sotapana
Sakadagami and Arhat and each suitah describes this Ayyapugala's side differently and I put
them together so I will just read some qualities of Sotapana which I think we'll be quite
familiar with it.
Here we are at a distraction of three letters, a big with a string enterer, who divers
aspiring for the unsurpassed security from bondage, he's one of right view and this
means that he's the one of the right people know about and who has not attained his
mind's ideal.
So I'll just take this take here, my god I'm interested actually what is the mind's ideal
in this suitah?
Well, for Sotapana is to be an Arhat and to be completely free from suffering, so he's
not quite there yet, but this whole quality is not referred to later one for Sakadagami
maybe.
And to pass security from bondage, be an Arhat, okay here I don't have any particular
question for Sotapana, so second thing is, he's Sakadagami, he says here with the other
distraction of three letters and with diminishing of great hatred and illusion, I'll be
quick one, one's returner, who after coming back to this world only one more time will
make an end of suffering.
Here with a distraction of the tense, a vehicle has realized for himself direct knowledge
in this very light the tenteless liberation of mind, liberation by wisdom and having
enter upon it, he dwells in it yet he does not dwell having contacted with the body
the eight emancipations.
He has actually not just a right view, right intention and other right qualities, even
over past, but also right knowledge and the right liberation.
This is Sakadagami, and he dwells contemplating the rising and vanishing of the five aggregates
subject to assumption.
So this is really kind of different described Sotapana, obviously the most interesting one
was if he has also right knowledge and right liberation.
It's those two are the ones that Arhatagami develops, which is why he becomes perfect,
which is why he becomes fully light in Arhatagami, it was the right knowledge and right liberation.
There were other suitors and that's mentioned, but those two are basically, he has them,
I think he has a notion of them, basically think of Sakadagami as Sotapana, who has applied
himself more than just the Sotapana.
So then he starts gaining the more of that knowledge, more of that liberation, so it becomes
almost like a discernible phenomena, discernible factor, but only an Arhat is fully developed
as, which is why he is an Arhatagami, so what is, what we mean by knowledge and right liberation?
Basically means just the continuation of the Noble-Afford path means that if those
that develop then he doesn't have to keep doing it anymore, he becomes it, because for
Sotapana, well, for all the areas, the Noble-Afford path they need to keep applying it, keep
sort of sticking to it, keep finding energy for it, keep resisting distraction against
it, even that's plot of fulfillment, then just the right knowledge and the right liberation
is a result of it.
And would be directly like for Sakadagami, or for this kind of person, create distinction,
or I'm not over Sotapana, I'm Sakadagami, because Sotapana is Sakadagami, but it keeps
since then.
Yeah, I don't think there would be.
I think it depends on the faculties of Sakadagami.
He might be, well, if he's faculties of Shapa, he might see that there are more perceivable
difference between when he was a Sotapana, and then after he is sort of weakened the
other factor of sensuality in your world, but it's not, it's just a gradual weakening.
Like, so he can look back and say, yeah, I'm stronger than when I had the right view, but
like, how much stronger?
Well, I am not free from sensuality, which means then I might be at the most Sakadagami.
If you were to be free from sensuality, then you're okay, so I'm, so, but see, if the
Buddha never laid out these four kind of constants, these four kind of guidelines, milestones,
now, cornerstone, milestones, you, they wouldn't have known, all they would have known is,
yeah, I've understood the Dhamma, yeah, my, my last version I've been kind of lessened
because of the Dhamma, or, oh, yeah, I don't have any more last nora version because
of the Dhamma, or, oh, my mind is completely bright and pure free from suffering and supreme
security of bondage, but they wouldn't have called it in those terms.
The Buddha laid it out only after, like, a constant kind of being harassed by, by questions
or where it is such, in such a month or even more, and where it is, because people wanted
to know how far they were in their practice, and then they would say, well, it's, it's
a real hassle.
If every time somebody dies, you come and talk to me and ask me about him, so, and he laid
down these critters, so it's just like a, kind of a general sort of criteria of the
state, and then, you know, because there is, I don't know if you include it, but there's
another sort about Sotapana, where basically it says, well, the common sort of description
is a seven lifetimes and most, but there is one sort that says, Sotapana dies, and basically,
while he's still in that experience of death, he becomes an Arhan, then I think the other
one is while he's in between, kind of, because he becomes an Arhan, or while he's getting
ready to be reborn or something, and he becomes an Arhan, or he becomes an Arhan upon landing
or upon being reborn.
So you realize, yeah, it's at most, so again, you give a general description, they will
include everybody who would be a Sotapana, but it doesn't mean the Sotapana has to go
through seven.
No, it just depends.
How much he has applied himself, how much, how much of these uppertilers are here sort
of abolished or weakened, and then, and how clear his knowledge is.
How much effort he has invested in the repetition of that knowledge.
So then, moment of death might be enough for Sotapana, and quite often probably would be,
as it was mentioned in the Sotas, that, oh, yeah, that is the complete dispassion, release
and so on, when they're dying, basically, when they have no more room for any distraction
or carelessness or complacency.
But if that doesn't happen yet, what they would have told us then, well, they won't
be reborn shortly enough human, and it would be at most several lifetimes, not more than
that.
And you understand this lifetimes more than the traditional way, basically, die and
then you will.
Well, yeah, but not necessarily as a human.
So you might be higher.
Well, basically, seven more returns.
Seven more reappearances, re-emergence at most.
Well, it can be two and a half.
I was thinking that maybe seven, seven, number seven is more metaphorical, because sometimes
number just means like, I don't know, there are 500 are, and this means exactly 500 means
like just a lot.
It means seven is few.
You, maybe?
Yeah.
Well, actually, yes, probably.
Because as you read, like, and even when it comes to anagams, like, ah, not written,
he's going to be incurable.
But then you read that, I think it's an anagami signita, they're like all these different
types of heavens, like, I don't know, with search or something, based on the different
fact, how strong the anagami's were in their understanding.
So it's basically just like one gradual development, then the Buddha laid out milestones for just
as an incentive, as a as a guideline, as a kind of clarification, as a sort of a place
of confidence as well, because you can, you can all, you understood.
Like, if you have, before the Buddha described what Sotapana is, the actual Sotapana is what
they've understood the Dharma, and be free from three fetters, they wouldn't have necessarily
known, almost certainly they wouldn't have known that they cannot be reborn, lower than
a human, that they cannot be reborn more than seven times, they wouldn't have known
that.
But, but saying by defining is like, oh, yeah, so then they, they do feel the release and
kind of a sense of, a sense of freedom and accomplishment, and that's quite important
as well.
And also, in a similar manner, by defining what Sotapana is, in terms of which practice
you're free from, what Sotapana can do, what Sotapana can do, what Sotapana can do, what
the Buddha is intentions is similar things, and you didn't, so does then actually it clarifies
you what you need to understand, so you actually kind of defines the work, defines the object
for your contemplation, because if you do understand, you would be the one, it's just, that's
how it works.
So, there is no look in between, no, I understand, but I'm not Sotapana, nope, you can't have
that.
So, you either understand, in which case you're Sotapana, so I understand, if I'm not Sotapana,
no, I'm not means I don't understand, because that's the only way of thinking that can
actually then keep you coding, coding you on towards understanding the Sotapana, if there
is anything in between that compromise will obstruct, so if you are able to hold a contradiction
of yes I know, and at the same time know that you, the one who doesn't know, well that's
massive contradiction of a very fundamental, essentially coding, somebody can tolerate
that, means they cannot become Sotapana, because of that, so it has to be black and white,
and be like, oh you know, well that's, yeah, it's harsh, but what do you want, you want
harsh, what do you want easy, that can kind of keep you put to dinner or harsh, that can
sort of make a Sotapana, and it's so hard, it's harsh only because you're sensitive,
so basically if a person thinks I've only a Sotapana, nobody short in a Sotapana understands
the Dhamma, means that any notion of them understanding the Dhamma unless they're Sotapana,
they will not take for granted, which means they will eventually understand what Dhamma
is, but if they take it, if they take it as that which they have understood, they won't
be making a further effort to understand it, and they will take it as that which they
have understood, if they are able to maintain conservation of somebody, yeah, I understood,
and at the same time know that they're not Sotapana.
So we may quote Sotapana doesn't have doubts anymore, but when he comes to some presidious
ness Sotapana, and maybe sees, and can he say, oh I'm sorry, I don't understand that one.
Yeah, yeah, probably.
Like you probably mentioned, there are reservations and some other things, but yeah, yeah, because
there are so many, so many different ways, well, they're all ways along the same universal
principles, but they're different approaches, and they're different expositions, and different
descriptions, and yeah, I mean, most of those people back in the day they haven't heard
it all.
So then, if they were to dwell on it, or they were to talk more about it, I'm sure they
would see it within the principles, but not by default, like suddenly they know everything
and everyone who ever said it, no, it doesn't work for that.
So basically, the Sotapana stage would be a really recognition that all these things,
this kind of, this is impossible, actually, to own five aggregates, like feeling, perception,
and so on.
Well, they would stop.
They would basically cease to assume a separate center of experience, the center experience
that is basically independent of the five aggregates, it's independent of anything that appears
for it, which is the Atavada, they cannot think that anymore, and by not being able to
think that anymore, all they would see is five aggregates arising, five aggregates ceasing.
So basically, all these aggregates would more feel like in longs more there, rather than
actually something that belongs to me.
Well, yes, but see, yeah, describing that would imply a comparison between hard feels without
atavada and hard feels without atavada.
Now, the Sotapana would feel released shortly after abolishing atavada, but then that
is the normal state.
So here's no old reference anymore to compare to this, which means that's it now.
It was very beginning, it didn't belong to him, so no, no, no, no, what I mean is he
doesn't have the old reference of atavada to compare to the new reference of all the things
don't belong to me.
There's a memory of it, but any kind of emotional release there will be initially upon understanding
until things settle, but in afterwards he cannot go back and kind of have the experience
of atavada and then compare it to the experience of the non atavada, which is what you compare
basically when you said like, oh, there in terms of how much release there is no, because
I would require him to still be able to access atavada, he can still access atavada
you're not free from it.
You have an abolished it.
He doesn't need much of remembering his argument mindless and care.
Yeah, because the right view is what his center experience is now.
So all he has to do really is not actively distract himself from that, because if he stops
distracting automatically the mind will go back to what is based on, and for so the
premise, based upon the right view, for putugina is based upon atavada.
So basically it's like he cannot anymore control, he doesn't he realizes in the first place
he was not as he could control in the feeling, the perception and the whole nature.
Yeah, there was no separate identity of self apart from those things.
So if he still remains, if he's still affected by those things to some degree, which is
what one would be, he would be just a degree that he still might kind of regard it as
for me, my mind, in relation to me, but not in relation to that independent sense of
self as a view, as like this, that just cannot, cannot rise.
So yeah, he couldn't possibly take things in such a permanent manner, even if he were
to make the effort to do so, he would be inconceivable for him.
So there's still a memory in this kind of longing, this kind of distance.
And the reason why he would be inconceivable for him is because things were truly impossible
to begin with, and that's why 100 is possible, by finding that out, you have then basically
undone the mistake of not knowing that he was impossible, which means what you have
to do that mistake, you can't really go back to it, even if you think about it, it just
doesn't, that it can't, it's inconceivable, it cannot happen.
And because if you didn't know before, you had a visa, that's why you were understanding
that now, this is why it was all the time, this kind of longing, basically kind of frustration
for Tanka, praying maybe to Gros for me, so I feel like, you know, I think the other
way around actually, I mean longing is more longing, like leaning forwards, like, for
it, you know, it's important for me, perception for me, it just kind of just very subtle,
yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, so you can kind of realize that, but then it's still time that
this old comma diminishes, basically still kind of effect, maybe a habit, can quite
have it, so the one still has a habit.
Well, he still has a habit, but he still also has a sense of I am, in terms of conceit,
yeah, so, yeah, it's not as much as for Petudjana, who is like fully self-centred in a completely
assumed gratuitous center of art of art, but still, so only for an artist, you can truly
say that all he has left are the habits, so the one still has a good three-quarters of
responsibility for his habits, especially if you don't have habits of last version
of evolution, and it's impossible, but you're really not habits then, and it's impossible
if he doesn't take this possibility for his sexuality, he can't ignore it, or he can
ignore it on the art of certain extent, because all he has to do is stop, to take a break
from all the destruction and unholes some habits, and at that time he will be looking at
his right view, from his right view, he just, that is his place of rest, so all he has
to do is not, not distract himself, not sort of get careless in the sense of take, and
then it would, at most, in seven lifetimes, basically, in any way, but he wants to fast
all he needs to do is practice his strength, basically.
It's like, well, all that has to be done, not to put the stick back to the water, that's
all.
Yeah, yeah.
There's things which are really rare in Saka Pekami, it says, if I read it again, here
with destruction of things, the Biko has realized what himself direct knowledge, in this
way alive, the dangerous liberation of mine, the liberation of wisdom, and having thanks
upon it, he trusts in it.
This is listed in Saka Pekami, does it mean this thing, so does it, doesn't have, why
it's just, I don't know if it's anything, no, it sounds bad, I don't see, this is not
Saka Pekami.
I didn't make any mistake.
If you didn't enter, the eight minutes patience comes later on.
No, it says, here with the destruction of the three fighters, the diminishing of greed
is in delusion because once you turn it, who after coming back to this world, who after
coming back to this world, one more time, will make an end to suffering.
And in the next paragraph that you say, here with the destruction of the ten, the Biko
has realized for himself direct knowledge, in this very life, the tenest liberation
of mine, liberation of wisdom, having entered upon it, he does it, he does not dwell, having
connected with the body, the eight emancipations.
So oh, I see, the last bit is different, okay, he dwells in it, he does not, I thought
just everything in the first sense, and that's our answer.
But even that, I think, well, I guess, no, this can be also said basically for a sotapana.
Because sotapana knows what nibana is, and he can enter upon it with wisdom, liberation
by wisdom, and he can be dwell in it.
But for as long as his body, the phenomenon of the body, I must say, like body into some
mystical experience.
But for as long as that body does not get established in it, he won't be in nibana
as an other hand.
But it is the same nibana, it is the same understanding, in that sense, yeah, even sotapana
has the notion of the right knowledge and right liberation, but it's very weak notion.
And as I said, the only other hand is fully developed it.
So basically, the difference between sotapana and sotapana is basically that, like you
said, sotapana is just more developed, sotapana, and one of the differences between
sotapana and sotapana has also the right knowledge and right liberation.
Okay.
And then it says, it was contemplating rising and seizing, the fact that it is a Dritra
assumption, that's also sotapana, sotapana, sotapana, sotapana, sotapana, sotapana.
And then, amagami, here, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, the biku is one
of continuous births, due to attained by nibana, without returning from that world.
And also, the births have been concentrated with the body, the eight emancipations, and
the same body, sotapana, sotapana, sotapana, sotapana, sotapana, sotapana, sotapana,
sotapana.
And then, as for the very, very fine type of reborn sotapana, sotapana, sotapana, sotapana.
So to that degree of residue, to that degree of almost, is going to have very well in one
of the purebotes, but even then, they told you that sanitamika, just dozens of them.
like one place for all noises, depending how much residue you have left, and you can measure,
even the voodoo can measure that, it's so subtle, because he said he will obtain the final
variation here now, oh, if there is an any residue left, he will go to the pierabot and then be
finished there, so, and that's why often Anagami's would have overestimated himself and thinking
there were other ants, but they couldn't tell, the voodoo would only be able to tell what I
see in the mind, but which means Anagami, that's already person free from sensuality,
aversion, virtually free from all the ignorance, he still couldn't tell, because he's just so,
so subtle left over, but it doesn't matter, if it's that subtle it doesn't matter,
because they're going to have a spontaneous rebirth in such a refined realm,
preserved only for such beings, and he'll be going up, but very soon upon landing again,
might be longer, might be a bit much more longer, and another one just here, just imagine.
I think there's some sort of some variations, yes, you know, it could be quite,
you're ready to jump from sort of the part of the Arabian ship, but what prevents
him to go to all to the Arabian ship, and he remains to be Anagami, is he's delighted and done well.
Right, just kind of step there, I think I'm holding on the last thing.
Yeah, yeah, no, I remember that, yeah.
It's just not the link from you.
Yeah.
Maybe it could be a little bit excited.
It's not that small, you're just not looking back thoroughly at the right view that brought
into that place, and not just because even that, even at the right view, you just completely
developed this passion towards, discussed this passion, relinquishment, everything else,
and then you're fully enlightened, and it's really just extinguished.
So they might not necessarily do that sufficiently, they might not necessarily experience
complete need be that towards the right view then.
And the most interesting things is he dwells hadn't contacted.
Contacted with a body, the eight emancipations?
Yeah, you should have gone to the eight emancipations.
Yeah, what is the body world?
What is the translation emancipation?
Art of immolca, okay, like liberation, okay, yes, shall I just read first?
Well, yes, sure, and then one processing Europa, Ciceropa.
Why not preceding the Europa internalists, Ciceropa externally?
One is released upon the idea of the beautiful,
or translation can be one is focused on and beautiful.
So, fourth one is through the complete surmounting of perception of Europa,
the passing away of perception of impingement and content and non-attention
to perception of diversity, perceiving in brackets.
Space is infinite, one enters and dwells in the base of infinity of space.
This fifth one is the same thing, consciousness is infinite,
six, there's nothing, seven, need a perception, non-attention,
eight, Ciceropa perception.
So, just first four really interesting things.
Well, the point is, you know, like, I mean, they are eight different,
but not eight different in a sense of one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight.
But it's basically one within that, you can go to the second one,
within that, you can go to the third one, within that, you can go to the fourth one.
So, if you have one, definitely you conducted all of them.
But how far, up that one, you will go.
That's basically how to find, in terms of development, your mind gets.
So, does every, every area, Puglara, say, a lot to do all these things?
No, not every Anogami and Arhant.
Not all.
No, that's the thing.
So, they contact those principles of such a liberation,
which means they get one, the first one.
One is the Ciceropa.
Oh, Ciceropa, yeah.
So, start with that.
Within that, they can, you know, is they're beyond,
as sometimes you're reading the service,
and then go further, in further, in further, until they go what?
The ultimate, and there is no beyond.
And it was a similar description when he came to Janas,
and that's a Sariputra in Magi Manika, one by one,
steps whenever, when he comes to the session of session.
He says, there is no beyond this, that's it.
So, basically, Anogami, sort of an Arhant,
Sakarigami, have not contacted with the body,
the principle of such, the liberation of two of these things.
Huh?
The understanding is phenomenal.
Well, I think that, because even, even those,
those are probably along the same lines that say,
A. Sotabana would have developed his mind.
So, he would have, he would have started
to get in the principle of the mind development,
which means that he hasn't contacted with the body,
which means he hasn't really experienced those liberations.
So, but if he, if he experienced,
well, a contact with the body means basically,
making, making such experience actual present,
not just resolve upon wisdom,
you can, you can clear it up with wisdom,
but actually, you haven't been establishing your mind
in the sense that, now, that experience is what is present
for you, actually, right there and then.
So, going to the body, wouldn't we,
let it take some mystical strength?
No, no, no, no, no, no.
Contacting with the body just means making it actual,
as opposed to, like, a peripheral understanding.
And it can be very, that's how, like,
people can resolve upon wisdom,
upon the element of Nibana, and become an Arhant.
Doesn't mean the resolve is put to, now,
you need to have the element of Nibana,
you need to understand what it is.
And then, if the mind gets resolve upon it,
it will drag the body into the actual experience of it,
if the mind doesn't come up.
So, that's where the pain of emotive,
like, liberate through wisdom.
Basically, he, he kind of shoots his mind out there,
towards the right principle that he isn't
understood through the clarity of his wisdom,
but he's actually quite far removed
in terms of actually experiencing
as an actual reason phenomenon that Nibana
are attaching him in the body.
But if he mind stays in it,
the body will eventually catch up with it,
and then he would say, yeah, he was liberated.
All you have, those whose mind is developed,
they're not necessarily understanding
all the, all the subtleties of Nibana,
but they clearly have the mind developed
to the extent of, yeah, they're actually experiencing
that with the body, that kind of the undetermined element,
and they can, they, they're experiencing,
they can hold onto it, they can have it.
Present, as opposed to, you know,
it's not like a momentary song.
So, that's like when people are sort of liberated,
both ways.
And, and in this case, basically, it's that.
So, these eight, just think of it as one,
and think of that one as standing as a description
of touching the body.
That's it.
So, within that, you can keep refining that
to the point of cessation and perception and feeling,
but you don't have to.
You can become a fool in life in Narahana,
just by touching the principle.
So, just by getting the first one.
So, how important is it now to understand this sutra?
What sutra?
Well, that sutra just gives you the ultimate
perfect scenario of going through all the eight.
Like, in the same sense, whenever Janas go,
they go through all four.
Then, whenever the material sort of establishments
of mind are described, again, they're all described.
But, there are all the sutras that we've said,
it's the strength of the first Janas,
enough for our own children.
Anagami needs to understand the first Jan,
and he can become fully enlightened,
or a hand. So, you might not have necessarily touched with the body,
the seven, and the eight, of those liberations,
but he certainly touched them all in a sense,
that the principle, which is kind of the first one,
the second one, and so on,
has been understood and has been touched with the body.
We've got one by one, at least, first four.
So, one possessing urukatsu is rupa.
This ice is almost just...
Well, see, this can be a long discussion,
because it's a sort of thing.
So, basically, if I were to sort of describe the emboleads to you,
then we have to sort of address the meaning of those words as well,
and then I might have to do the meaning of those words as well.
So, most concisely, basically,
the experience consists of two points of view,
simultaneously present.
One coming from the direction of the conscious body present in the world,
and another one coming from the point of view of, basically,
nama rupa.
So, the two points of view at once,
which is why reflection is possible,
which is why our energy is possible, really,
because if there is only one point of view to your experience,
right there and then, there would be a sense of self.
There would be a center.
But the reason, there's always two.
They cannot be one.
So, if there's always two,
they cannot be one self.
They cannot be one conceit.
So, two points of view of one.
So, imagine you've become very skilled.
There was two points of view of rupa.
Simultaneous, that's what five aggregates are.
It's two points of view.
Two things simultaneously present.
Two directions, two points of view.
They don't come together.
They don't meet.
They don't cross.
There is two points of view
with their respective directions.
And then, because you have two points of view,
you can sometimes see the same thing twice.
But it doesn't mean that you see it independent of those points of view.
It just means you recognize that thing is double present.
Two points, it appears in both directions.
And that's it.
But there is no outside of those directions, by the way.
So, attention cannot be resting on one point of view
or the other point of view.
But it's the assumption of the external in regard to the two points of view
that causes the whole confusion and so on.
So, imagine you've removed all the confusion.
And I've just said two points of view.
And, because of that,
the confuses two points of view is that
it doesn't see them.
It doesn't see the two points of view.
It's just me, basically.
So, imagine you remove the confusion in regard to two points of view.
And, well, the possibilities are endless.
Well, not endless.
They will end in this station and perception and feeling.
So, with one point of view,
you cannot perceive the other point of view.
With the other point of view,
you can perceive the other point of view.
Or with the other point of view, you cannot perceive the other point of view.
So, I mean, while we're pursuing a little bit internally,
it's a little bit stunning.
I would basically have it before.
Yes, it is.
It's just a principle.
It's just a principle.
Okay, then you can sort of move along, really.
Or, to the point of, when you basically stop giving attention to either points of view.
And then, that's the cessation.
Well, they will pretend that the other,
are the four, really.
Like, in between the two points of view, so to speak.
Not externally,
just, basically, not based on the two points of view.
Whereby, it will culminate in cessation of perception and feeling.
Or the both points of view.
The word beautiful,
in those third lines, which is interesting,
that you're beautiful or focused on in the beautiful.
Well, there's another, I don't know if it's in the sense of the nonsense,
and it says, he sees beautiful in ugly.
Or he sees ugly in the beautiful.
Ah, actually, ah, I'm comfortable to suit that.
Right, well, it's, it's, it's, again, it's on the same things.
Because the super limiter, it's obviously always on the basis of what is kind of,
a limiter, and that limiter is always basically a suba.
In the sense.
Sure.
Okay, go for a recording.
One recipient of forms internally,
cis forms externally,
limited, beautiful, and ugly.
One recipient of forms internally, cis forms externally,
measure as beautiful or ugly.
One not recipient of forms internally,
cis forms externally, limited, beautiful, or ugly.
One not recipient of forms internally, cis forms externally,
measure as beautiful or ugly.
One not recipient of forms internally, cis forms externally,
blue ones,
blue in color,
with a blue, with a blue tint.
And that goes straight to the yellow,
because then it's red and it's white.
So, first one is,
this is like the white recipient of forms internally,
cis forms externally,
limited, beautiful, or ugly.
So, say, basically, the money,
the money really about super limiter and so on.
Yeah, you can see beautiful in ugly.
Oh, you can see ugly and beautiful.
And basically, discerning that,
that depends upon the two point of view,
present at once,
you would see that, well,
beautiful in terms of intoxication loses its power,
because you just see beautiful,
that simultaneously seen as ugly.
So, you could just resolve upon seeing the beautiful
in everything that is really around you,
which is ugly,
or you could resolve to see ugly in everything that's beautiful.
It doesn't matter.
It doesn't matter. The point is dispassion
in regard to the two.
So, only when people have one point of view
and what they have presented,
well, when they assume one point of view,
and what they have presented in front of them,
is the beautiful, there's that kind of mesmerizing
and lasting song with the beautiful,
mind is locked up on it.
You see, it's simultaneously,
just simultaneously present, again,
as another point of view,
automatically cannot be as beautiful,
which means it's ugly,
for whatever reason.
And then the second one is about,
the first one was like,
it's limited,
but then becomes, measure us.
Yeah, infinite.
Infinite.
So, finer,
arises on the basis of infinity,
so only because it's possible for things to be infinite,
they can be finer.
So, in the same sense,
a finer thing, a defined thing,
right in front of you,
that has a reason to view your point of view,
you discern the other point of view,
becoming through that thing,
and then you see, yeah,
it's on the basis of infinity.
The domain of eight point of view,
one of the point of view,
or the nature of the point of view,
the nature of the direction is that infinity.
So, you start seeing that,
while the finer thing is present in front of you.
So, with limitless,
you see limited,
or with measureless,
you see limited,
or with limited,
just what point of view you attend to,
and what aspect of the point of view you attend to.
And again,
the purpose of that,
is the full dispassion
in regards to the five other rates,
the structure of the experience.
So, you don't have to really say that one,
if like it's least,
or one to eight.
No, of course,
in the same sense,
like the casinos,
the ten casinos,
you can develop a full energy upon one,
upon the first one,
or maybe if somebody else is on the second one,
or maybe if somebody is on the third one,
but not, you know, up to ten,
that's it.
But doesn't mean you have to go one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten,
ten, I need a service read.
Sorry, eight casinos.
You know,
it's only four missing institutions.
So, there's one, I think the ten casinos.
Sorry.
The four elements,
the four colors,
and then the space in the consciousness.
But the colors is four.
And then space in the consciousness.
But it doesn't matter,
because the first casino is already
the principal casinos there.
So, you're just refining the same principle
that you get in the first place.
So, you don't have to.
Yeah, it's interesting.
This is exactly the four colors,
plan, what I was talking about,
what's perception.
The perception perceived blue, yellow, red, and white.
Yeah.
And there's a nice splitter.
There's a verse, actually,
saying, having touched with the body,
the deadless element,
free from clinging,
having realized the linkishing
of clinging,
his stains are gone.
The fully alighting one proclaims
the sorrowless state
that is void of stain.
So, then with our other hands,
says, here with the destruction of the tent,
the vehicle has realized,
for himself, with the wreck knowledge,
in this very light,
the tankless liberation of mine,
liberation,
white wisdom,
and having entered on it,
he dwells in it,
and he also
do well,
and having contacted with the body,
the eight manifestations.
Yeah, he dwells
in it, that's his actual experience, basically.
That's when those, I think,
thinking the notes is imagining kind of there.
I didn't even disagree with some translation,
kind of what it was,
but he mentions that, oh,
this is the kind of show,
to kind of show how, like,
an area,
sort of fall away from the banner,
and then there are problems, sort of,
not falling away.
There are problems not falling away from the banner,
and that's when they committed suicide,
things like that, because they had kind of, oh,
got sick, and then they couldn't.
So, yeah,
it's one thing to understand the banner,
to kind of develop it,
to the point of that,
becoming your basis,
of, you know, how you replace,
at a lot of the right view,
well, then replace that right view,
with, like, a fully, sort of,
just relinquished,
undetermined element.
Turned in the banner.
So, that takes time to develop it.
That's when it's a noble effort path, kind of,
eightfold, sort of, covering different aspects of it,
as needed,
because some people would be,
because of this, some people would be falling away,
because of that,
and that's when some people fall away less,
or fall away less far.
So, you have different areas, you have,
within the defined areas,
you have different types.
It's a really weak sort of banner,
it's barely sort of a banner, it's strong sort of a banner,
it's existed,
because they get reborn in different places,
because of the different strength.
These four kinds of beings,
the number ones,
and they also take the skillfulives,
for people maybe,
grasping wrongly, and for boosting the ego.
Some people go to another extreme,
or you just make a political,
and just be here,
and don't think about these four stages.
Well, yeah.
Some people would say,
it's just like a carer than a donkey,
keeps encouraging,
you know, just, like,
open the stage to go to the stage.
So, there's nothing wrong with that.
This is actually,
but I think it's better to accept them as criterias,
because if you don't,
then you won't be making effort.
When people say,
ah, don't try to become anything.
Well, they would say that only because they haven't become anything.
So, then they start dismissing the goal of becoming something
valuable,
because if it's,
no, it becomes a sort of a banner,
because that is what you're supposed to do.
So, it's good enough to become a sucker again.
Of course.
It's good to say that.
Well, somebody here is all such and such and such and such and such,
such a banner.
Well, I can do it then,
because of that craving,
he actually makes the effort and does it.
But if the one who hears about somebody
becomes sort of a banner or somebody coming out of hand
says, oh, there is nothing to become anyway,
you can know for sure he won't be making an effort.
That's just how it works.
Why would he be making an effort when he dismissed the goal?
He dismissed the name.
So, that's why the Buddha was encouraging such aim,
so that you can crave for it,
because of which you would abandon the craving
and then actually become one sort of a banner.
So, only people have got anywhere in the book,
who didn't get anywhere in the practice,
would be dismissing it,
who would say, they would say things like,
oh, there's nothing to be able to try to become anything,
there's just nothing to be becoming,
or they would say things like,
the more you practice, the less you know,
and I've been 30 years in robes and, you know,
I feel like I know even less,
as if that's a good thing,
should be embarrassed to say that.
That's how you're wasting.
Means you actually should be more embarrassed.
Imagine there is something you need to learn,
something you need to get fixed,
and you fix it on a second day,
and then you meet somebody who can't fix it for 10 years.
You would say, it's pretty, pretty cold,
isn't it?
And you wouldn't take advice from him, wouldn't you?
Would you take advice from somebody who fixed it in two days?
Or for somebody who couldn't fix it in 10 years?
Would you take advice on how to fix it?
Who would you choose from?
Ha!
Simply just people indulging their own weakness.
So see, they haven't got anywhere,
not because they like faculties,
not because they like support,
not because they like health,
because they like determination,
they like faith,
they like clarity,
they like to fight enlightenment factors.
And then they indulge in,
then they make that to be the goal,
like not getting anywhere,
is the goal of the practice.
Certainly it's not a goal of the Buddhist practice.
Because if they were,
he would have said so.
He would have not said entirely the opposite thing.
Ha!
So...
As soon as the monks,
they were quite,
not quite clear maybe,
but there was some knowledge
who attained what,
maybe things were spoken up.
But now this goal is to know if she is spoken.
Yes, there's nothing there.
And they just hope that other people will assume
what they're hopeful,
but the only reason they don't speak about attainment
is because they don't know what they are.
If they don't know what they will be speaking about it,
because that's just along the lines of Dhamma.
So, should we actually
the book question?
Of course not about this thing.
Yeah, you should be careful.
You should be careful in terms of,
some people in the past have used it
and used it to gain the offerings and so on.
But, no, of course it should not be.
I mean, it's a personal thing.
And then they won't tell you,
because you're just asking casually,
and that's not a casual thing.
But, no, of course it's not, you know.
Well, like if you were to book,
the book wouldn't have spoken about it.
Also, for the environment of practice,
so the panel basically can practice
for attainment of the environment.
It can be in the family,
it can be in the workspace,
not anymore.
So, theoretically, yes.
But, in the Buddhist time,
because in those days,
the world hasn't been proliferated
as much as it is today.
The availability of destruction,
the freedom from fear,
anxiety, sickness,
aging deference,
you were all kind of sheltered from it.
It's all quickly covered, it's all quickly fixed.
It's all quickly sort of painted over.
Plus all the destruction,
the majority, many fold,
ways of getting it,
as absolutely.
So, we require the effort to step back
from the pool of the world and society.
Too much effort.
You have a lot of effort.
We require too much effort for today's person.
Back in the day,
when the world did not have as much pool
in terms of its proliferation,
in terms of its diversification,
then, yeah, they could have.
For those who wanted to send down
or had asked me,
Nirvana, what's the duration to do?
Well, they lived the world.
They had to leave the laylife.
You can't be a layman, and expect it to.
It was hard back.
In the Buddhist day, they would say,
oh, laylife is crowded and dusty,
and we have so much to do,
and so many responsibilities we can't practice down there.
Imagine today.
Imagine today.
It's just a mess of clutter.
It's absolutely not possible.
It's just a mess of clutter.
Sure, it doesn't need to put the role.
Like, there's nothing special with the ropes.
It's just an external statement.
But what a layperson needs to do is
justically change their living environment.
Ah, not leave as a common layperson.
And today,
in pretty much practically speaking,
the way to change that environment
is to find a forest monastery.
If you can do it by as a layman,
going, yeah, sure,
you can, and it is possible.
But, yeah, I think it's important to
recognize the back in the Buddhist day
was hard as a layperson.
20,000 years later,
it's virtually impossible.
And the effort doesn't mean
that they have to sit like many hours meditation.
Yeah.
They try to read a sutra
and try to understand,
at least, the position,
and everything.
The effort means they have to sit for many hours,
trying to understand the meaning of done.
Many hours.
Many days, many times.
But if they actually spend the time sitting
doing a meditation technique,
well, they'll be better off as a generous layman.
They'll be less misguided, probably.
Just as a layman who doesn't try to practice done,
but it's just been generous in virtues.
But instead of if they sit,
cross like watching the nostril observing the belly,
they should sit for many hours,
or walk for many hours,
and keep doing the understanding of dharma.
What are the factors?
Understand the nature of the factors?
You'll be free from them.
What are the following virtues?
See the following virtues?
See the principle of them?
You will be realizing them.
But that won't happen by itself.
That won't happen if you sit cross like,
and watch a breath.
Or do any other.
So the main thing we have to learn
is really how to contemplate,
because people can go to another extreme,
some iteration, but didn't do it in the entire thing.
Yeah, of course.
Yeah, when I say try to understand,
I don't mean like doing scholarly work,
and fixing all the declinations of Pali,
all the time.
I mean actually try to understand the nature of things.
So you can see how,
well, it sounds very vague to people.
And the reason for that is because the thinking
is so far removed from any form of correct thinking,
and just the concept of thinking is,
it seems so vague.
Also, what do I think about?
Give me an object, you know.
An object is really subtle, that's the object.
Yeah, that's what people struggle.
They think like,
what has to be the object of my thought then?
Because they can't comprehend thinking
without a clearly defined object.
It's like, well,
think about the nature of your sense-basis.
You see how ambiguous that is for most people.
The more ambiguous it is,
the more far removed from it you are.
But you won't fix that by
sort of finding a completely different object
to think about.
You'll fix it by thinking about an ambiguity,
trying to clarify.
Ready the suitors?
Get the info you can?
Relate, think about it,
and then if you become clear,
you start discerning your experience
why?
Because you're making the effort to discerning.
But if you don't make the effort to discerning,
if you make effort to do some,
I don't know, mechanical technique,
or to be thinking about a particular mantra
or something else,
because you'll never descend the ambiguity
of your senses,
or of your nature of the soul,
or anything of feelings,
to that matter.
Yeah.
So it's ambiguous only because it's not clear.
And it's all clear,
because there's never
any effort made towards clarification of it.
So, and then, actually, you know,
for someone who is aiming
from high developments of the pana,
you would say that actually
complete seclusion is necessary,
giving more away from distractions.
For an authentic person, yes.
For a person who's not running away from things,
but for a person who's actively making the effort
in overcoming them.
You're talking about from sort of a dilemma.
Oh, sorry, I'm talking about a dilemma.
Sorry.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah, if somebody's already discerning the pana,
if they want to become, yeah.
Yeah, he has to be.
Again, back in the day,
it would have been maybe possible
living in the outskirts,
depending on the village,
depending on the village,
and so on,
and kind of having interaction with us.
But I think even back then,
to put a cap sort of resorting months,
there are empty hearts,
there are empty roots of trees,
empty forests,
empty jungle, basically.
You have to.
So, today, imagine how much more you have to do that.
Back then, you can go for a retreat like that,
to the work,
and then, you know,
come back to a more comfortable setting.
But today, I think,
it's very much, much more.
Is there hope for our partnership
with this person?
Yeah, yeah.
There's hope as long as there is hope
that we can be safe.
