So the sutras I'll read out now are concerned with thinking and thoughts.
The first sutra is in the Majuminikaya, I'm a 19 and it's called Two Kinds of Thought.
Thus have I heard on one occasion the blessed one was living in Sarvati, there he addressed
because thus, the blessed one said this, because before my Enlightenment while I was still
only an unenlightened Bodhisattva, it occurred to me, suppose that I divide my thoughts into
two classes, then I sat on one side, thoughts of central desire, thoughts of ill-world, thoughts
of cruelty, and sat on the other side, thoughts of renunciation, thoughts of non-ill-world,
and thoughts of non-cruelty.
As I abided thus, the diligent ardent and resolute, I thought of central desire erosing me.
I understood thus, this thought of central desire has arisen in me.
This leads to my own affliction to the others affliction and to the affliction of both.
It abstracts Wisdom, causes difficulties, and leads away from nibbani.
When I considered this leads to my own affliction, it is subsided in me.
When I considered this leads to others affliction, it subsided in me.
When I considered this leads to the affliction of both, it is subsided in me.
When I considered this obstructs wisdom causes difficulties and leads away from nibbana,
it subsided in me.
Whenever a thought of sensual desire arose in me, I abandoned it, removed it, and did
away with it.
As I abided thus, diligent, ardent, and resolute, I thought of ill will arose in me, I thought
of cruelty arose in me.
I understood thus, this thought of cruelty has arisen in me, this leads to my own affliction
to others affliction and to the affliction of both, if struts wisdom causes difficulties
and leads away from nibbana.
When I considered thus, it subsided in me, and whenever a thought of cruelty or ill will
arose in me, I abandoned it, removed it, and did away with it.
So this is from the point of view that he was a bodhisattva, so someone who was inclined
to go to my experience.
But he also, so he clearly knew what nibbana was, because he said it leads away from nibbana,
so he already had the understanding of what nibbana is, and then he decided what if I divide
my thoughts in these two categories, because basically you can also say these two categories
is the thoughts that lead away from nibbana, and the thoughts that don't lead away from
nibbana.
Thoughts that lead away from nibbana are thoughts of sensuality, ill will, and cruelty, thoughts
that don't lead away from nibbana are thoughts of non-sensuality, non-yield will and non-cruelty
of renunciation.
So nibbana is something to be understood, which is by understanding, brings you closer
to it, and then developing your mind in regard to that understanding, basically makes you
sort of abide in nibbana, like an arahanya.
I'm saying this, because most commonly nibbana is understood as some sort of transcendental
art of this world state, that you kind of stumble upon if you have luck, if you've been
trying hard enough, then it happens to you.
No, it's basic, it's a practice of understanding, understanding what nibbana is, understanding
what dispassion is, seeing it as valuable, as the most important thing, seeing it as peaceful,
seeing it as worthy, and then developing it, developing nibbana, yeah.
And another thing to point out there, it's essential thoughts are rosy in me, so essential
thought would have a reason, in Bodhisattva, or in Sobri, who takes it, and you recognize
it, either rises on its own, and that's not on him.
What is on him is wrongly attending to it, attending it as valuable, attending it as dear,
delighting in it, wanting it, proliferating it, but turning your mind away from it, then
the thing will disappear.
So he would see, oh this is harmful to me.
This is not pleasant or agreeable.
It leads to my harm, it leads to harm of others, it leads to harm of both, and ultimately
it leads away from nibbana, which is the ultimate goal.
So there would be enough, and then that thought would go away, because the mind would genuinely
not want it, which means then either has a reason, or it's on a court, and then it has
seized why, because it hasn't been, you know, somebody turns up in front of you, and he's
unwelcome, and he leaves, because he realizes he's unwelcome.
You're soon to continue, because whatever big of frequently things and pundits is upon,
that will become the inclination of his mind.
If he frequently thinks and pundits upon thoughts of central desire, he has abandoned the thought
of renunciation, to cultivate the thought of central desire, and then his mind inclines
to what the thought of central desire.
If he frequently thinks and pundits upon thoughts of ill will, upon thoughts of cruelty, he
has abandoned the thought of non-ill will, or non-cruity, to cultivate the thought of cruelty
or will will, and then his mind inclines to what the thought of cruelty.
And he gives a bit of a little simile, just as in the last month of the rainy season in
the autumn, when the crops thicken, a car herd would guard his cows by constantly tapping
and poking them on the side, and that with a stick to check and curve them.
Why is that?
Because he sees that he could be flubbed, imprisoned, find, or blamed, if he let them
stray into the crops.
So too, I saw in unwholesome states danger, degradation, and affarmment, and in wholesome
states, a blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.
As I abided thus, diligent, ardent, and resolute, a thought of renunciation arose in me.
I understood thus.
This thought of renunciation has arisen in me.
This does not lead to my own affliction, or to the others affliction, or to the affliction
of both.
It aids wisdom and does not cause difficulties and leads to nebony.
If I think and ponder upon the thoughts, even for a night, even for a day, even for a
night and day, I see nothing to fear from it.
But with excess of thinking and pundering, I might tire my body, and when my body is tired,
the mind becomes strange, and when the mind is strange, it is far from composure.
So I steadied my mind internally, quieted it, wrought it to singleness, and composed it.
Why is that?
So that my mind should not be restrained, and likewise with the thoughts of non-airworld,
and thought of unhappiness.
And again, because whatever a vehicle frequently thinks and punders upon, that will become the
inclination of this mind.
If you frequently think and punders upon thoughts of renunciation, he has abandoned thoughts
of sensual desire, to cultivate the thoughts of renunciation, and then his mind inclines
the thoughts of renunciation.
And the next simile, just as in the last month of the hot season, when all the crops have
been brought inside the villages, a cow herd would guard his cows while staying at the
root of a tree or at or out in the open, since he needs only to be mindful that the cows
are there.
So too, there was no need for me, there was need for me only to be mindful that those states
were there.
Tires, tireless energy was aroused in me, and unremitting mindfulness was established.
But you didn't have to chase an individual.
My body was tranquil and untraveled, my mind composed and unified.
And then he goes into the janas, goes through the janas and all the different knowledges
that he had, you know, he had tamed all the ignorance was banished and true knowledge
arose.
So which is weakening there as well, though, but just to address what he said before.
So first a person needs to know what mebana is, which basically means a person needs to
develop samadhi, needs to get the right view.
Once the right view is there, all the person has to do is divide his stalks into wholesome
and unwholesome, into those that lead away from mebana and those that lead towards mebana.
Actually, Mark Pajapati came to the wood and said, oh, can you give me a short instruction
and I will go on a retreat, leaping the forest.
And he said, whatever you know, it's wholesome, whatever you know, it's unwholesome abandon
it, whatever you know, it's wholesome cultivated in terms of the thinking.
And it's exactly the same.
So with the right view, all you need to do is divide the thoughts into categories and
stick to it.
So sometimes it's going to be hard work as much as it is to guard your head from like,
don't go too much left, don't go too much right, don't go into this crop, don't go into
that crop because you'll end up in serious trouble.
But once that's done, then all you need to know, her is there, all you sit under the tree
on top of a hill and see it is there, no problem, they're not going anywhere because there's
nothing pulling them now, all the crops are gone.
So they're just just kind of at ease sitting on a field and you can see it and that means
oh, you're not, you have so much energy now, such a piece, no worry, no distraction,
not tired, and you're established upon that and that is the pleasure of John.
Because, what is your thoughts of renunciation, you don't be cultivating it.
Exactly.
Thoughts of renunciation.
Yeah.
The cultivation basically comes down to saying no to sensuality, saying no to your will,
saying no to cruelty.
When you get established upon that, it's just there and that is effortless.
And knowing that, then this whole joy and the unremitting mindfulness and pious energy
arises and that's the first genre of the thoughts are there.
The thoughts that are not thoughts of sensuality, not thoughts of your will, not thoughts of
cruelty.
And by having just these thoughts there, you know, ah, those unhoresome thoughts cannot
enter.
They're gone.
They're disposed.
Because these people were trying to cultivate thoughts of kindness, certainly.
Well, yeah, actually, just kind of gave me another point to say, ah, people will try
to cultivate practice of genre in very common sense, so to then not have sensuality and
not have this.
But that needs to be abandoned beforehand, through wisdom and clear seeing, and then
you enter the genre.
So when these, like, quite secluded from unhoresome states, as every description of genre says,
then the mind gets settled in that and established, and then he enters and abides in that genre.
As I was saying earlier today, then he can, once his mind is abiding in genre, and that's
some of the sort that he walks around, he urines, he defecates, he extends his arm, he
does it, and his mind is in that genre.
That's secluded from unhoresome states.
Like dear, in a mosquito-free marsh, or like months in a mosquito-free marsh, right here.
So the point is then, once such level of uninterrupted clarity is established, with the right view,
which means with knowledge of when the mind is, then the mind gets developed knowledge, further
and further and further, as that suitable dog.
And that's, enters and abides in the banner, and he's finished.
No more arsevers to come back, and it's done.
In the banner, it's not hard to understand.
It's subtle, because people's minds are too far away from it, because they revolve
around sensuality, ill will, and cruelty.
But the banner literally means absence of greed, aversion delusion, means absence of passion,
cooling down all the passions you can imagine, subtle of course.
See, the protugina can get his head around that.
And if he was to stick to it, stick to avoiding unhoresome, stick to virtue, stick to sealer,
stick to all of those other things, they would be conducive towards his idea of this
passion, then he would actually clarify that idea more and more, and with further reading
of the silters and input from the Buddha, or if he has a living art, a hunter, a living
sort of fun, even better, but even without it, he would actually come close and then, yeah,
that's what the banner is, and get the right view.
But it would require, obviously, quite a great deal of mind development, of sticking to
the, you know, not letting your mental thoughts, your heard wander into the crops.
Doesn't mean saying no to everything, you don't have to say no to things, that it doesn't
involve sensuality, it doesn't involve cruelty, it doesn't involve ill will.
But you certainly need to be very mindful of it, because it might involve sensuality, it
might involve, it might involve ill will, always being efficient in myself, to others, does
it work?
No, it doesn't bring a fiction to me, no to others, no to both, okay then, but even then
you don't eat negligently, you don't give into it in negligence.
So with my sensual design, always, sexual integral, you say, will this bring a fiction to
myself?
Yeah, like the other sort, that is to be completely abandoned, there is no ground whereby
sexual intercourse, or sensuality of that kind would, oh, can be done mindful of something
that you can't, so you can eat mindfully, you can sort of come across sight, sound, smell,
taste, touches mindfully, but sexual intercourse cannot be done mindful, so that needs to be
abandoned.
Causing a fiction to others, using another person, and entanglement, difficulty.
And fundamentally, as I said before, as a synthesizer before, the one we read, you can't
have sensuality without being bound by sensual perceptions, sorry, you can't engage in a
sexual intercourse without being bound by sensual perceptions, so you can't, you can't say
I'm free from sensuality and then practice sexual integral, impossible, because there's
no sexual intercourse without your mind being bound by sensual perceptions, and if the mind
is bound by sensual perceptions, well, that is as far from the bond as it can be.
And the suit will end with my favorite things, what it says, there are these roots of trees,
empty hearts, meditate because you're not delay, or else you will regret it later.
So, because you have in the right view, you know what Mibane is, now go to these empty
dwellings, roots of trees, forest, mountains, and practice, develop further clarity.
Don't be negligent.
So, that suits the ends, and that is what the best one said, because we're satisfied
and delighted in the best ones here.
So, there's another suit on this, on this same subject of thought, that's the next one,
my dhima, my dhima nikah, twenty, the removal of distracting thoughts.
Thus, have I heard, on one occasion, that this one was living in Salvation, there he
He addressed the Bikku's us, Bikku's, Renable Serlope playing, the best one said this.
Bikku's, when a Bikku is pursuing the higher mind from time to time, he should give
attention to five signs, what are the five?
Here, Bikku's, when a Bikku is giving attention to some sign and owing to that sign,
they arise in him evil unhulsing thoughts connected with Paziah, connected with hate, with
delusion, then he should give attention to some other sign connected with what is wholesome.
When he gives attention to some other sign connected with what is wholesome, then any
evil unhulsing thoughts connected with Paziah, with hate and with delusion are abandoned
in him and subside.
With the abandoning of him, his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to
singleness and compose.
Just as a skilled carpenter or his apprentice might knock out, remove or extract a coarse
peg by means of a fine one, so too, when a Bikku gives attention to some other sign connected
with what is wholesome, his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness
and compose.
If while he is giving attention to some other sign, you are so dressed so you don't
be.
Well, obviously, the main thing that emerges from this is understanding the nature of the
sign.
So, the mind arises on its own, it's a phenomenon, it's manifested.
You attend to its aspects and based on the aspect you are attending, based on the signs,
signs and tokens, as often it says in the cities.
So, this is like a general notion in regard to the reason mind, to the reason thought.
By attending to them, then you might be contributing towards more of the unhulsing thoughts or towards
going back to the wholesome thoughts, depending on what you choose to attend to.
So, the point is to recognize it as a slightly indirect nature, in a sense that you are not
trying to deny what has a reason in your mind, or you are trying to deny what mood your
mind is in, what a general state mind is in.
You are not denying that, you are just recognizing that by attending to something else, it will
drift away from that if there was unhulsing, if there was wholesome, then it's fine.
You keep your watch on it, so to speak, so if it's wholesome, it doesn't mean you become
negugent, as I said just a minute ago.
You keep watching, but it's an out effortless because you don't need to take it away from
it.
So, it's like a, again, a similar of a cow herd that you have to keep an eye.
If the cows see the green crops, well they will be very inclined towards it, then you have
to hold them back, and that's hard work, and it's tiresome.
So you then foresee the sign of the green crops, they will disturb, they will excite the
cows, so then you direct them somewhere else in a different direction where they won't
see the green crops, and then they'll become, because there's nothing exciting about it,
and then you'll be at ease, because you don't have to work hard to keep it away from
the crops.
This is simple and technical.
Exactly.
So, you recognize by being in such environment, or by thinking in certain things, well the
mind will get excited.
So you don't do that, you look at the opposite, you focus on the opposite, so then the
mind comes down.
But it's important to have that sign of that mind, to recognize it for what it is.
It's an independent enemy.
It's not you, because they would imply that direction, sorry, direct kind of controllable,
which you don't have.
As a reason is, so you have indirect responsibility by bringing your cowhurt foolishly in front
of a green crop, what you expect going to happen.
So you foresee that, and you don't put them there, you put them somewhere else, maybe
behind the corner where they can't see it.
Then they might smell it, every now and then, if the wind blows in the direction.
So then you refine the signs and tokens you pick on, okay, they don't see it, but if
the wind blows the smell it, so then in a different way, when you block the smell, you
light the fire, so the smoke kind of obscures the smell of various things.
Point being, you recognize the mind as an independent animal, that needs kind of catering
and watchful eye.
And that's how you take it away from sensuality and bring it closer to new bond.
Well, so it continues, if wow, they're giving attention to some other sign connected with
what is wholesome, they're still arise in him evil unwholesome thoughts connected to
desire, with hate and with delusion, then he should examine the danger in those thoughts.
These thoughts are unwholesome, they are reprehensible, they result in suffering.
When he examines the danger in those thoughts, then any evil unwholesome thoughts connected
with desire, with hate and with delusion are abandoned, in him and subside.
With abandoning of them, his mind becomes steady, internally, quieted, brought to singleness
and concentrated, just as a man or woman, young, youthful and fond of ornaments, would
be horrified, humiliated and disgusted with the carcass of a snake or a dog or a human
being, who hunt around his or her neck, so too when a big examines the danger in those
thoughts, his mind becomes steady, internally, quieted, brought to singleness and composed.
So when simply directing away, or whatever was unwholesome, is not enough, then you have
to make more of an effort, whereby you start dwelling on the dangers of letting cow
go into the crop, imprisonment, trouble, difficulty, fine, basically the dangerous sensuality.
So then the like gives you more motivation to take it away from that which excites it,
this will take your mind away to bring it to this passion, to not give in to passion.
But while he is examining the danger in those thoughts, they are still arising in evil
and wholesome thoughts connected with desire, with hate and with illusion, then he should
try to forget those thoughts which should not give attention to them, when he tries to
forget those thoughts and does not give attention to them, then any evil unwholesome thoughts
connected with desire, with hate and with illusion are abandoning him and subsides, with
abandoning him, his mind becomes steady, internally, quieted, brought to singleness and composed.
Just as a man with good eyes, who did not want to see forms that had come within range
of sight, would either shut his eyes or look away, so too, when a big could try to forget
those thoughts and does not give attention to them, his mind becomes steady, internally,
quieted, brought to singleness and composed.
Go back into the, using the car soonly, car heard, so you have taken the car away from
seeing the crop, there is no smell of the fresh grass, fresh crop, disturbing them anymore,
they are tied down to the ground, you keep an eye on them, but basically they are still
excited, because they still have the memory of the crop, but then you just sit down and
ignore them, because you know, well they can't get there, could you turn them away, they
are secured, wherever they are away from the crop, just ignore them, because they will
calm down, and then they calm down, you don't fuss around, because it disturbs you,
you recognize, okay, you needed to fuss around until there was still a danger of them
going into the crop, but now you've done, you removed that possibility, now just ignore
it and they'll calm down.
Like for seeing, they go into the forest, there won't be any central disturbances, you
go to the forest, you take your mind into the forest by basically walking your body there,
and then you leave your mind, your body there, which means your mind is bound with it, so
your mind has to be in that forest, in that environment, and then it will calm down,
there might be memory of the perceptions of excitement of whatever else, but sooner or
later it will calm down, it gets there, it gets there, it gets there.
If while he is trying to forget those thoughts and is not giving attention to them, there
is still a rise in him, evil and wholesome thoughts, connected with desire, with hate and
with delusion, then he should give attention to the stilling of the thought, determination
of those thoughts.
When he gives attention to the stilling of the thought, determination of those thoughts,
then any evil and wholesome thoughts, connected with desire, with hate and with delusion,
are abandoned in him and subside.
With abandoning of them, his mind becomes steadyed internally, quieted, brought to singleness
and concentrate, composed.
This is a man walking trust might consider, why am I walking fast?
What if I walk slowly?
and he, he would walk slowly, then he might consider, why am I walking slowly, what if I stands?
and he would stand?
then he might consider, why am I standing, what if I sit?
and he would sit?
then he might consider, why am I sitting?
what if I lay down?
and he would lay down?
By doing so, he would substitute for each gross posture one that was subtly.
So that point, or that step, so to speak, basically that's the step that goes beyond
wholesome and unwholesome.
Why?
Because addressing unwholesome and addressing dangers with wholesome didn't work.
The threat is still there.
So that step pertains to the nature of thoughts, stealing that which determines the thinking,
that which every thought has in common, be wholesome or unwholesome.
And what every thought has in common is movement as a phenomenon.
On the level of images, of mind, there is a movement.
So you recognize, okay, they want to move in this direction, I take them, I move them
into this direction, then they want to move, they still want to move in the other direction,
then I ignore the movement, then I do this.
But when none of that works, then you start refining the nature of the movement.
As a result of that, the course movement, sorry, the core sensuality that's being carried
with a course, a form of movement, is being saved out.
So if you're walking fast, which is what sensuality is basically excitement, you slow down
and then there is no room to that refined movement for a course movement of sensuality
to come through.
Then you refine it further and further and further until it's still and it doesn't move.
Because there is no sensuality, there is no disturbance, there is no excitement without
mental movement.
It can be a mental movement without that particular excitement.
And that's why you use mental movement, refining of the mental movement, so to abandon
that particular unwholesome excitement.
Then the mind comes out of that singleness, that stillness, but the excitement is gone.
And then you can go back to the normal, whatever daily movement of a wholesome thought.
To do this, you obviously have to be able to see your mind still, yeah, obviously.
Even to do the first step, you need to have the sign of your mind, which means you need
to have the right view again.
Because that section sounds like I've heard others explain it, that one should think
slowly.
You know, like, I am going to get that, so in a way, you are kind of slowing down your
thoughts.
Well, you are refining your thoughts.
You are slowing down the movement of your thoughts, but you are not slowing down your
discernment or your clarity.
You are slowing down the intentions, what is it?
No, not necessarily.
Your intention is to get rid of the unwholesome.
It's still very much present, you are refining, you are basically seeing unwholesome, there
is the unwholesome thought, there is a thought, there is a movement within that thought, that
is dictated by that unwholesome basically.
So you can say like this, there is an unwholesome moving thought, refined that, there is a moving
thought, refined that, there is a thought, still thought, it doesn't move.
So you start seeing within the movement of the unwholesome thought, and then within that,
and then within that, and then within that, and that is stillness, and that is quite
requires clarity and a clear notion of the sign of the mind, sign of the thought.
You are not saying to slow down your thoughts, but actually just discern a more general phenomenon
based on that.
Sure.
So that's when we pertains to the nature of the thought.
The unwholesome moving thought, wholesome moving thought, they shared it in a particular
aspect, they shared the same nature of a moving thought.
Then moving thought of the pertaining to unwholesome, moving thought pertaining to wholesome,
you can take it further, what are they having common, they are moving thought.
But as any moving thought, no matter of the movement, has in common, it's a thought.
Exactly, that's what it says, I'm walking fast, why am I walking, why is this body
being moving fast, why don't I slow it down, why don't I stand, why don't I have the
body in a non-moving position, not running fasts, I'm walking slowly, not walking slowly
standing, not standing, sitting down, not sitting down, laying down.
So what all of this push is having common, they are all body, they will pertain to the
body for you refining in terms of the movement, in terms of the engagement, subtle and subtle.
But the thread of the clarity of pertaining to the thought or pertaining to the intent
of abandoning unwholesome remains, that thread stays through all of that.
Hence you use it to abandon the unwholesome movement of your thought.
When nothing else worked, you use it basically until the unwholesome falls off and then
okay, now you can start moving here, if you want, if there is a need for it.
It continues, if while he is giving attention to the stilling of a thought determination
of those thoughts, they still arise in him evil unwholesome thoughts connected with
desire, with hate and with delusion, then with his teeth clenched and his tongue pressed
against the roof of his mouth, he should beat down, constrain and crush, mind with mind.
When with his teeth clenched and his tongue pressed against the roof of his mouth, he beats
down, constrain and crushers, mind with mind, then any evil unwholesome thoughts connected
with desire, with hate and with delusion are abandoned in him as a side.
With the abandoning of them, his mind becomes steadied in totally quieter, more to singen
us and compose. Just as a strong man might seize a weaker man by the head of shoulders
and beating down, constrain him in crushing, so too, when with his teeth clenched and his
tongue pressed against the roof of his mouth, a big who beats down, constrain and crushers,
mind with mind, his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singen us and composed.
When nothing else works, you still refuse to allow cowherd to go into that crop, because
no matter how hard it is, it's still not as hard as then in during the punishment, once
they've gone into the crop. So if you have to, you then just basically put the rope and
just pin them down until they come down. So if it exhausts you, but still the purpose
will be fulfilled. Keep the cowherd away from the green crop. It has become down, they
can't, they themselves will tie it up. So you just make your determination stronger
along the last thing, then they're the determination.
It's quite a simple thing to understand that, if you can see this is unhorsing, no, and
you just stop. And that's the thing, but what people don't understand then, the pain,
the sharp pain that will come seemingly because of the restraint, the fear, the panic,
the neurosis, everything else that comes, that's all part of that cowherd rebellion, that's
all part of the weaker man's. I mean, you don't know he's a weaker man until he comes
down based on your grip. Then you know you're stronger. So you'll find out you're stronger
if you prevail. But people usually, when he comes down to restraint and then the pain
comes and then the fear, various emotions now being caused by you become more sensitive
or whatever else, then people start developing lots of views on account of that. Views that
take them away from are quite simple. This is wholesome, this is unhorsing. You start
justifying it, or you start giving in. So you do need the right view to not give in to
that, because anybody can practice restraint, but restraint in itself does not lead to
the right view. It aids the right view to fulfillment, but it cannot bring you the right view
by itself. Again, if you don't know what Nibbana is, you can't possibly know what comes
closer to it, what drifts away from it. So you clarify as much as you can with what Nibbana
is, and then you start emulating the behavior, mental states, actions of that which is in
Nibbana. Acting like an Arhan, exactly. Not like, well, I'm not an Arhan yet, so I can
do it. No, you can't. If you're not an Arhan yet, you need to act like an Arhan, harder.
And yeah, you know, it might break somebody. Now, one people up to such a point that they
act, but that's the real risk. Because not to say like, act like an Arhan. No, no, no,
yeah, it doesn't mean act like an Arhan, act in front of others, means like, don't tolerate
anything and wholesome in your mind. If you don't tolerate anything and wholesome in your
mind, you won't be able to engage in anything and wholesome by your speech. If you can't
engage in anything and wholesome with your speech, you can't do anything and wholesome with
your body. It doesn't mean go around, you know, acting loftier than everybody else or
whatever else. No, act like an Arhan, it means emulate Arhan in your thoughts.
Yeah, and he's practicing. Yeah. And yeah, this is the ending of the sutra. Because when
a Bikku is giving attention to some sign and only to that sign, they rise in him evil
and wholesome thoughts, connected with desire, with hate and with delusion, then when he gives
attention to some other sign connected with what is wholesome, any such evil and wholesome
thoughts are abandoned in him and subside. With the abandoning of them, his mind becomes
steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness and confused. When he examines the danger
of thoughts, when he tries to forget those thoughts and does not give attention to them, when
he gives attention to the stilling of the thought of determination of those thoughts, or when
with his teeth clenched and his tongue pressed against the roof of his mouth, he beats down
from strange and crutches, mind with mind, any such evil thoughts and wholesome thoughts
are abandoned in him and his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness
and composed. Then this Bikku is then called a master of the causes of thought. He will
think whatever thought he wishes to think and he will not think any thought that he does
not wish to think. He has severed craving, flung with the fetters and with the complete
penetration of the conceit, he has made an end of suffering. This is what the Blessed
One said, the Bikus will satisfy him and delight it in the Blessed One's words.
I will.
