So these suitors are from the Samyutani Kaya, the connected discourses, and this is a
chapter on feelings.
And this suit is called should be seen, because there are these three feelings, what three
pleasant feelings — painful feelings — neither painful nor pleasant feelings.
Pleasant feelings — Bros. Beku's should be seen as painful.
Painful feelings should be seen as a dart — neither painful nor pleasant feelings should
be seen as impermanent.
When Beku's ability had seen pleasant feeling as painful or painful as a dart in neither
painful nor pleasant feeling as impermanent, he's called a beggar who sees rightly, he
cut off craving severed the fetters by completely breaking through conceit. He has made an end to suffer.
One who has seen the pleasant as painful and the painful as a dart, seen as impermanent
the peaceful feeling, neither painful nor pleasant, he is a bicker who sees rightly one who fully understands
feelings. Having understood feelings, he is tankless in this very life, standing in the dharma
with the body's breakup, the knowledge master cannot be readied.
That's what I was saying this morning, in relation to central pleasures,
that seeing centrality as painful, the centre, the centre, the core of a central desire
that is always regarded as pleasurable, that can't tip, that satisfaction, seeing that as painful
in a sense of understanding, that pleasure to be the pain, not denying the fact that it's
initially to see this pleasurable, that will free one from central cravings, and then
applying the same principle onto the nature-feeling in general whereby whatever is being felt
you regard as disagreeable because it was felt, and that's pretty much what this sutra says.
You regard pain, sorry, you regard pleasure as pain, pain as even more as dart,
and you are feeling the peaceful feeling you understand. It cannot be controlled, it cannot be
owned thus, it's impermanent, it has a reason, it's impermanent, and I said that this morning,
that's the difference, if you do that then basically you'll free yourself from conceded further
towards our country, as opposed to if you just do the same principle, but in regard to the
particular essential pleasure, it will free you from sensuality,
but now you have to take that application onto the general level of the nature of feelings,
whether it's being held, and they will free you from conceded, from the sense of I am.
And this sutra refers to that second freeing self from conceded, the whole thing.
Obviously, if it just feels out from conceded, you may free from sexuality as well.
But this is right to see, and to see pleasant feeling as painful,
because it is pleasant, so what is the painfulness of it?
Then it's pleasant, then it's self, it's afflicting you.
See, when you ask that, you expect you to find pain in relation
or somewhere else from that pleasure, but okay, so it's pleasant, but what is pain in there?
The pleasure, it's the pain.
Nothing left to write up or down from it, it's that very pleasure that is painful,
and that is not seen directly.
Why is it painful? It's because it's... Well, see, the reason you ask why,
is because you still don't know, you're still doubting it that it's painful,
which means you're not seeing it as painful, thus you're asking why is it painful, how is it painful?
But any of the answers will not make it clearer.
Any of the answers will not make it, will not make you see directly.
But I can give you an answer once you see directly.
Well, you can give an answer once you see directly,
but you have to be careful when you give an answer, because then there's a person
I think they understand the answer without seeing it directly.
But if you want to be accurate in describing it, it's what the sutra says.
That pleasure is pain.
Not knowing that, you perceive it as pleasure.
Like a leper regarding burning coals as pleasurable, while they were actually always painful,
or like the actual perception of it was also always very disagreeable.
But you have to say to yourself, yeah, as investigating it.
As investigating it, you basically first have to see that pleasure for what it is.
And then, while it's simultaneously present, you have to simultaneously,
while pleasure is there, you have to regard it as disagreeable, as painful, as dangerous.
Another similar I was explaining to you this morning was the trap.
For as long as you don't see the deadly trap hidden in it,
it's meant solely for you to catch you,
you will still regard aspects of that bait as agreeable.
Even if sometimes you might suspect that there is a trap,
the fact that you are not sure, the fact that you don't see it,
it would be enough for you to still regard some aspects of that bait as agreeable,
as desirable, as attractive.
But if suddenly the danger becomes apparent,
if you see what kind of trap it is, whereby even if you just stand and look at it,
you are at the danger of being trapped, let alone if you engage with it,
then you will not want anything to do with any part of it.
So, before it was pleasant, that trap, because you didn't know it was a trap.
But it was always a trap.
Now you know it's a trap and any desire towards it, it's absolutely gone,
because you know it results in a certain death.
That's a surely.
So rather than trying to explain to you why it is a trap,
you really want to allow that phenomenon of that pleasure of that bait,
whatever it is, to rise for what it is, obviously, without engaging with the priority strength present.
So if thoughts arise, you have to see them for what they are,
you have to let that pleasure arise and then feel that pain, that it's revealed by the restraint.
When the mind stops trying to kind of run away from that pain that is revealed by the restraint,
you are left with that bait in its entirety, and then the trap can become apparent.
But not before your mind stops trying to avoid it,
because people practice restraint, but when things do arise on the mental level, obviously,
they're not engaging in unwholesome sensual activity with their body,
but on mental level thoughts still might arise, and then they will be feeling them,
or indulging them, they will not be understanding them.
So by neither feeling or indulging them, but letting them arise for what they are,
when you stop feeling that the risk of doing something unwholesome basically means your mind
has developed in regard to those thoughts, it's not an immediate pressure by them,
then you can actually see for what it is, and then you can see the agreeable as unpleasant.
Why? Because it's a trap. The agreeable.
It's obviously subtle because it involves perception,
the domain of perception, the domain of feeling.
You can also regard it basically, you can also regard it from a perception point of view,
not from the feeling point of view. From a perception point of view, it is being
that perception is perverted, so the agreeable aspect of the central perception is actually painful,
that might make more sense.
Literally being touched by that in that manner, it's actually painful.
Because you touched. Because you touched full stop.
Because you touched by the trap. Because giving in kills you.
Giving in maintains you, keeps you, and matters domain.
Giving in makes you be reborn for EMS and EMS, and because of that,
direct result of that experience, every single misfortune that a mind can think of.
Many times.
Because of that sweet tip of pleasure, or because of that seemingly agreeable delightful perception.
No matter how tiny or small it is, it's actually that very tiny, tiny little perception of that
delightfulness, that is a pain. So you have to basically start looking at that.
Because everything else is management. Explain to yourself why you shouldn't engage in
sensuality and everything. Obviously, you need it in the beginning. But only to the
bring you the point where you can see directly that in itself, it's actually pain.
Rising of sensuality of any sense, or potentially the main of any kind, it's actually pain.
It's actually piercing that.
And then perception is not perverted anymore. Again, similar to the burning coil, burning
coils. So that lapper is basically burning himself with those coils.
And he regards that as agreeable, while it's actually always being disagreeable.
But it's because of his disease, his assumptions, he never stops and thinks, hold on.
Is this really agreeable? This very center of that delightful agreeable tip of the pleasure
really is no. The fact that it presses you in that tiny, tiny manner that are very like to the
cold. It's actually very unpleasant. It burns. Like you're touched by a rod, by a hot rod. Like you rest
through, but it's fine. But that bit that it touches you, it hurts. And if it's obviously if it's
like a tiny bit, you might not necessarily even feel the pain initially. It just feels like two
centers, two concentrated. But nevertheless, it is pain. If you leave it, it will longer you'll see it.
And that's what the restraint shows. Basically, when you start saying no, that pain starts to build
up, pain of not engaging in your desire, which is actually the pain of the touch of the desire.
Or the agreeable perception. Or the seemingly agreeable perception.
So obviously people who never develop their mind, they will keep regarding restraint as the reason
for the pain. But actually, restraint just shows you what touches you. Pain touches you. And that's
why you can't not give in. Mind that's not developed, can't handle pain. So when a desire touches you
and desire equals pain, when desire touches you, you need to give in, because you are too painful, too painful to not give in.
So there is no pleasure. There is no pleasure. Pleasure is relatively marvellous. Yeah. Pleasure is
misperception, sensual pleasure, sensual joy, sensual delight. It's all the result of a version of
perception. Regarding that which is generally painful, regarding the touch of the painful as
pleasant. Why? There is no reason why. That's why it's gratuitous. That's why you can free yourself from it.
By seeing that actually this is a, this is a predispanable. You will automatically stop
regarding it as pleasant. Does any infatuation, any desire, any loss towards it, evaporates,
cannot possibly remain. You are saying to certain experience and agree with perception. Do you
have to rewriting the deception? Yes, yes. I was in there this morning. Keep applying.
Are you rewriting it so to speak? Yes, or rather restoring the right order, because now it's
the better order order. So that's why I meant by rewriting. Repair it. But seeing it is painful, seeing it.
Yes, seeing it. But you have to first allow that agreeable perception to arise for what it is.
And then while that phenomenon is present, while that phenomenon is persisting, while it is changing,
while it is enduring in your experience, which means you are mindful of it, simultaneously
with that phenomenon, you will get that phenomenon in its entirety as painful. While pleasant as
painful, while agreeable as actually disagreeable. And that is like finding the source of infection
and right there, just applying the antibiotic, the medicine, as opposed to having the source of
infection still covered up with that skin or whatever else, and then you're applying. And on top of that,
you're applying medicine on a completely different body part. So it's not just the fine
radius, but actually have to uncover it. So you have to get to that allow that sweet, delightful
enticing center to appear without actually pulling in, which means the restraint, virtue,
sealant needs to be well established before. That's what I said. You can't let your mind be engaging
in distractions, even of non-central nature, because that remains the basis for sensuality,
mental mind. So when the mind is not giving in to any distractions or any kind, then all it has
is what's in front of it, which is basically feelings or sensuality. It's always not free from it,
because that those thoughts are the thoughts that are becoming up, but now you haven't been
running away. You haven't been obscuring them to the distraction of a different kind. And obviously
you haven't been compromising the restraint. The restraint of the eye faculty, nose faculty,
ear and so on, haven't been compromising sealant virtue. So basically, then that sweet
sting of desire in regard to side sounds, mouth taste touches that hits you, you kind of let it
hit you basically. Because that's not the problem. The problem is you then doing all some things
on account of it. But now we know you want, because all the strain and non-distraction,
so when it hits you, it's seen. Actually, this is pain, because you have no choice. You're a victim
to it hitting you. And if the mind still has the assumptions of I was hit by the pleasure,
so to speak, you start seeing, yeah, that pleasure is aggressive, that pleasure is pain,
that pleasure is attack, that pleasure is a track. That is not a pleasure. A desire for pleasure.
A desire for pleasure. Well, it's, it's almost, it's converging itself. It implies the desire,
it implies the desire. So yeah, the pleasure is the perversion. Yeah, because it did.
You all need to do a sit, sit down, having been restrained. Having been restrained, having
practiced mindfulness properly, having not been engaging in all sorts of kind of
mind oblivion based meditation techniques, but actually practice clarity and composure.
Then when sensual thought arises, either rises in its entirety and you see for what it is.
And they end up being a whole danger. They hold danger with it, but still it will have that sweet
center. That it's still just that bit. It's still okay. This is all dangerous. This is all the
track. You can still let yourself, but the mind still regards this pleasure. This sweet center
is still the track. This will sweet delightful tip of the pleasure is still the track. It's still a
bit of danger, but it's still regarded as sweet delightful. And then you start seeing that.
And when you do that, you recognize sweet delightful equals pain, sweet delightful equals pain.
And then you don't have to do any management because you've really approved that sting.
It's, it's pushed out. It doesn't actually pierce you anymore in that sense. So the wound is closed
and this thing is out of here. And like I put it says, what is pleasant here? Nothing is felt.
Yeah, nothing is felt. So what is pleasant in the body and that freedom, the fact that nothing
is felt is the utmost pleasure. Because you see feeling as being. And by it seems so,
you're completely drawn from it. And the mind cannot turn away towards it.
I think it's really hard for me to sit down and meditate usually.
But when I'm sitting here, I'm listening to you. At the same time, mind goes in.
Yeah, because that's what your meditation should be. I know, like,
it's hard for me to sit down and meditate. I sit down and observe my breath or do something.
Yeah, it's a completely wrong thing to do to begin with. What you have to do is understand what
the Dharma is. Then you know how to meditate. So now you're trying to meditate. No one
that you can't. It's actually good that you can't do it because you have less of wrong notions
to undo later on. But while I'm listening to you, my mind gets really disturbed.
Well, exactly. Because that's the whole point. Understanding establish your mind. Understanding
is meditation. That's why the Buddha always talks about only about understanding. Everything
culminates in understanding and wisdom. While I'm listening to you right now, I've thought of
moments of pleasure sexually. Yeah, moments of pleasure. Now I'm repulsed by it, like my
can physically feel repulsed by it. Because that's the reason why people don't see. The reason why
people maintain the perversion of perception is because the mind is not developed in regard to it.
The mind has never been steady. The mind has never been developed. The understanding has been
initiated. Nothing like that. So then they just carry on. So even when you go and sit and meditate,
you should do the same. Read a sutra before and then try to understand it in your own. That's
what meditation is. Like really remove any notion of any technique, any body-watching, observing
sensations, but not none of that. Just understanding. When you understand, then you know how to
continue that as practice of clarity or practice of sanity or samadhi. It's still within the same
right view. But if there's no right view, then you'll be just wasting your time just doing some
other relaxation techniques, I guess. And it was the same. That's why back in the day when people
would hear the dharma, the mind would come down. The mind would be focused. The mind would be in samadhi.
Not by watching the nostrils, but by actually understanding what is being taught. Dispression,
disenchantment, cooling down, the mind. That result in a calm mind. That's just how it works.
Right now I'm really investigated on this a sensual touch. I almost feel that vomiting, right?
Well, actually, yeah. Yeah, they had the suit as well. I think tell it, they would refer to that, like
like you sort of, you push, what I said pushed out, but I think I read before, you kind of
you vomit it out. The sting of sensuality was kind of deep inside of you. It comes out and it's
done. I always like, but the way I get the signal, like when you vomit the food, you have no desire
for it anymore, once you vomit it out. And that's when you see sensuality is painful, it's vomit
the food. That's how much you want it. Zero. Even if you're really hungry, you will not be eating that.
Because it's horrible. Because it is horrible. And let alone the fact that it's very dangerous.
But the key is that as a layman as well, indulging in sensuality. You indulge and then the
after effect you go, they're disgusting. That was disgusting. But that's not enough. There's no
no, but you know, there is, there is something. You need to begin it, yeah, because most people don't
even see it as disgusting. Because you've passed what you just did. Yeah. What you did yesterday.
But then you forget it. Even like when you're eating, try thinking about sexual
integrals. It's actually disgusting while you're eating. Well, when you're not hungry anymore,
then the mind goes, goes towards such fantasies. But even like somebody who's not really trained
or developed their mind, just think while you're eating. Then you say, oh, no, I'm going to eat.
Because it's pretty horrible. And I'm like, the monkey is like the dogs. Look at that. I'm actually
not horrible. But a version of perception needs to be seen directly. Like what I said,
pleasure needs to be seen directly while it's present as pain. Otherwise, everything
else is going to be revolving around it. And it will not be approaching that center of that
state. It's just going to be managing it while remaining stung by it.
Well, this is the suit that I'm going to read now. It needs to be connected with everything you
would talk about. Also from the Samyutani Kaya. And it's called exploration.
So that's how I heard on one occasion, the blessed one was dwelling among the kuru's.
But it was a town of the kuru's name, Kamasadama. They had the blessed one dressed
because that's Bikus. Venerable sir, those Bikus you've played, the blessed one said this.
Do you engage in inward exploration, Bikus? When this was said, one Bikus said to the blessed one,
Venerable sir, I engage in inward exploration. How do you engage in inward exploration, Bikus?
And the Bikus then explained, but the way he explained it not satisfied the blessed one.
Then the Venerable and under said, now is the time for this blessed one. Now is the time for this
fortunate one. Let the blessed one explain inward exploration. Having heard it from the blessed one,
the Bikus will remember it. Then listen and attend closely and under, I will speak. Yes,
Venerable sir, the Bikus replied. The blessed one said this. Here Bikus, when engaged in inward
exploration, a Bikus explores thus the many diverse kinds of suffering that arise in the world,
headed by aging and death. What is the source of the suffering? What is its origin? From what is it
born and produced? When what exists does aging and death come to be? When what does not exist? Does
aging and death not come to be? As he explores, he understands thus the many diverse kinds of
suffering that arise in the world, headed by aging and death. The suffering has acquisition as its
source, acquisition as its origin. It is born and produced from acquisition. When there is acquisition,
aging and death comes to be. When there is no acquisition, aging and death does not come to be.
Well, just to point out before, this is what you said, it is important to understand that acquisition
means, well, loosely owning regarding things as yours, acquiring them. But it doesn't mean that
it's the things fault. So when people sometimes release, they think, oh, so I must not own anything
and they start giving away and throwing stuff. Well, you might get rid of the stuff, but the
acquisition as a phenomenon will still remain, which means then you will just appropriate something
else. You will appropriate your status of being a beggar, or your status of not owning anything
will be on value. So it's not so easy as to just give up your possessions in order to be free
from acquisition. Acquisition is based on mental assumption of possibility to own things.
You stop acquiring them when you realize you can't own them in the first place. It's impossible.
Not fully understanding that it's impossible, but that's enough for the ownership. Even if you
don't have anything practical. It continues. He also understands ageing in death,
it's origin, it's cessation, and the way leading on that is in conformity with his cessation.
He practices in that way and conducts himself accordingly. This is called the Bikku
is practicing for the utterly complete destruction of suffering for the cessation of ageing in death.
Then engaging further in inward exploration, he explores thus. What is the source of this acquisition?
What is its origin? From what is born, from what is it born and produced? When what exists does
acquisition come to be? When what is absent does acquisition not come to be? As he explores,
he understands thus. Acquisition has craving as its source. Craving as its origin is born and
produced from craving. When it's craving, acquisition comes to be. When there's no craving,
acquisition does not come to be. He understands acquisition, its origin, its cessation,
and the way leading on that is in conformity with its cessation. He practices in that way and
conducts himself accordingly. This is called the Bikku is practicing for the utterly complete
destruction of suffering for the cessation of acquisition. Then engaging further in inward
exploration, he explores thus. When there's craving arises, where does it arise? When it settles
down upon what does it settle? As he explores, he understands thus. Whatever in the world has a
pleasant and agreeable nature, it is here that this craving arises. When it arises, it is here that
it settles when it settles down. And what in the world has a pleasant and agreeable nature?
The eye has a pleasant and agreeable nature in the world. It is here that this craving arises when
it arises, it is here that it settles when it settles down. So to the ear and nose, the tongue,
the body, and the mind have a pleasant and agreeable nature, it is here that this craving arises when
when it arises, it is here, that it settles when it settles down.
Because whatever ascetics and grounds in the past,
regarded that in the world with the pleasant and agreeable nature
as permanent, as happiness, as self, as healthy, as secure,
they nurtured craving, in nurturing craving, they nurtured acquisition,
in nurturing acquisition, they nurtured suffering.
In nurturing suffering, they were not free from birth,
aging in death, they were not free from sorrow,
lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair.
They were not free from suffering, I see.
So it's just another way, basically, of describing
that but it's on by the principle,
just in case people are not free.
Yeah.
With this, this is, presence of craving, presence of acquisition,
presence of acquisition, manifold suffering in the world,
manifold suffering in the world, aging in death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, belief, and despair.
But the principle is the same.
When what is present, this comes to be.
And craving is present, acquisition comes to be.
But that speakable, this association comes to be,
both are actually in the present tense.
So literally, when craving is present, acquisition is.
When acquisition is present, manifold suffering
in the world is.
If it comes to be, you kind of expect
certain amount of time to pass it.
But no, presence of craving equals presence of acquisition,
absence of craving, absence of acquisition.
That's why simply by nurturing that,
upon which craving depends, you nurture death
and everything else, at the very other end of the same principle.
As I said, with regard, if they regard the world with a pleasant,
as a pleasant and renewable nature, they
regard this permanent happiness as self, as healthy, as a cure.
They nurture, they nurture, they nurture, they nurture.
And as you don't have to go around and regard everything
as horrible, despicable, all you need to do
is just regard the pleasure as such when it arises.
When there is no pleasure, no need for anything,
no need for any application of that medicine
I was talking about before.
Because when it's a neutral feeling,
all you need to do is understand it,
not engage in indolence, not engage in distraction.
Not trying to go into boredom, but in my sound when, oh,
world is pain, world is a god.
In a way, yes, why?
Because you regard world as pleasurable.
But you apply the notion of this is pain, this is pain,
this is that only to that pleasure in regard to the world.
And if you do so, there will be any craving in regard
to the world.
Absence of craving, there will be any acquisitions in the world.
No acquisitions, no suffering.
No suffering, that's it.
So he gives a simony.
Suppose because there was a bronze cup
of a beverage having a fine color, a Roman taste.
But it was mixed with poison.
Then a man would come along, oppressed,
and afflicted by the heat tied, parched, and thirsty.
They would tell me, good man, this beverage in the bronze cup
has a fine color, a Roman and taste.
But it is mixed with poison, drink it if you wish.
If you drink it, it will gratify you
with its color, a Roman and taste.
But by drinking it, you will meet with death
or deadly suffering.
Suddenly, without reflecting, he would drink the beverage.
He would not reject it.
And thereby, he would meet with death or deadly suffering.
So you can think of the same simuline example.
Imagine, I come to you, and I actually give you poison.
Then I say, it tastes nice.
Would you drink it?
Would you drink any of it?
If I tell you, it's a deadly poison, he would use it.
This bottle has a poison.
This is a poison, 100% poison.
He has a very nice taste of poison.
Would you like to drink it?
Only five.
Only five is there.
But only if you haven't heard me, then I say it's poison.
Or completely mad, basically.
Which is why the Buddha did say, or put you in as a mad,
to the effect, because they're bombarded,
engaging in sexuality voluntarily.
That is madness.
Obviously, it's, you know, this is a lovely drink.
Then you have to discern, it's actually a poison.
But imagine if somebody comes and there's
no lovely drink, it's straight, poison.
That tastes lovely, like a lovely drink.
But you wouldn't even consider it as a lovely drink.
I drinkable.
Why?
Because it's a poison.
Would it be worth it?
It would be valuable.
It would not have the significance of to be drunk,
because it's a poison.
When you see a cup with a nice drink, nice juice, cocktail,
whatever, oh, this is a drink.
I'm going to drink it, but this is a drinkable.
But if you see a bottle with a scar and bones on it,
that's equally probably even tastier than this drink.
You still want to regard it as drinkable,
because it's a poison.
So that's my point here.
That's how you actually start, need
to start overriding that which you regard as drinkable,
as consumable, as delightful, as agreeable,
as pleasurable, centrality, like not even as such,
because it's a poison.
Because whatever ascetics and Brahmins
in the past and future or present,
regarded that in the world with a pleasant and agreeable
nature as impermanence, as suffering, as non-self,
as a disease, as fearful, they abandoned craving.
In abandoning craving, they abandoned acquisition.
In abandoning acquisition, they abandoned suffering.
In abandoning, in abandoning suffering,
they were free from birth, aging in death.
They were freed from sorrow,
lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair.
They were freed from suffering.
Again, just period as it says there in the beginning,
that which is pleasurable, they regarded as pain,
as fear, as impermanence, as disease,
not everything around you, because things
that are neutral, things that are irrelevant in terms
of sexuality, in terms of pleasure,
in terms of delight, in terms of attraction,
you don't have to worry about.
And here's another summary.
Suppose because there was a bronze cup of a beverage
having a fine color aroma and taste,
but it was mixed with poison.
Then men come along, impressed, and afflicted
by the heat, tied, etched, and thirsty.
They were telling, good man, this beverage in the bronze cup
has a fine color, aroma and taste,
but it is mixed with poison, drink it if you wish.
If you drink it, it will gratify you
with its color, aroma and taste.
But by drinking it, you will meet death or deadly suffering.
Then the man would think, I can quench my thirst with water,
way, porridge, or soup.
But I should not drink that beverage,
since to do so would lead to my harm and suffering
for a long time.
And that's exactly the point I just said.
Having reflected, he would not drink that beverage,
but would object it, and thereby he would not
meet a death.
Things that are not pleasurable and citing
the life of intoxicating, they're not a problem.
So he can drink water, way, things that are not desirable,
but serve the purpose.
But things that are desirable are the ones
where sensuality is.
So basically, by freeing yourself from that,
by seeing the danger in desire, you feel yourself from desire.
That doesn't mean you stop eating, you stop walking,
you stop dressing, you stop talking,
you stop doing whatever you were doing.
Unless, obviously, whatever you were doing
was an awesome based on sensuality.
Then you won't be doing that.
So that's exactly what that man realises.
It's that sweet tip of the pleasure that he has to say,
because that's where the poison is.
So all he has to do is drink water, bring something else,
that it's not sensuality, that it's not craving after,
that it's not delighted in, something that is neutral.
He's so mean, it doesn't give you rise.
To desire, you have to.
But you can only do that when you full understood the danger
of desire, when you can spend your life eating,
the blank food and so on, and still be bound by sensuality.
Because obviously, you're not seeing
that desire is dangerous, you're just trying to avoid it,
prevent it from rising.
But the only way to prevent it from rising, once and for all,
is to develop full dispassion in regards to it, in regard to it,
not by trying to avoid things.
You have to start by avoiding, either by restraining,
but that in itself will not lead to understanding.
I think I said before, it's a necessary prerequisite
of as a basis for developing and understanding,
but in itself, avoiding, I mean, still avoiding sensuality,
but avoiding itself will not lead to the end of sensuality,
seeing pleasure as pain, seeing sweet as poison,
that is what's going to free you from sensuality,
and then you can engage in neutral stuff.
Like what the city is called in English.
In what I just said before he started reading the sutra,
that's what meditation is, inward exploration,
figured like, made understanding, practicing understanding.
There's no method that will tell you how to do the understanding,
figured like, made understanding, practicing understanding.
