Let's call it the samadhi suddha, the first book of the samyut and the kaya, David the samy
faya.
Let's see.
So I had one question, particularly on one passage, but I think I'm just going to see the
whole thing.
Some good things might come up as that's okay, so that's what I heard.
So when I came in, a blessed woman was doing a raja in the hot spring park in the
venerable samidhi, having risen to the first flesh of dawn, went to the hot springs of
the day, having bathed.
Then, when the night advanced, certain dayvata approached him, having approached, she stood
in the air, and dressed the venerable samidhi in verse, without having enjoyed, you seek
alms, be cool, you don't seek alms, after you've enjoyed, first enjoy be cool, then you seek
alms, don't let the time pass you by, he responds, I do not know what the time might be, the
time is hidden and cannot be seen, hence without enjoying, I seek alms, do not let the time
pass me by.
So it's kind of like a twospeck, I guess it means like the day is just telling me, enjoy
what you can.
Yeah, it was a common belief as well, you enjoy sensuality and to get old, then when you
can't get much from it, then you go for even today, you see that.
Oh yeah, but that's all in the assumption that you may not live forever, or you're going
to live at least reach an old age, but even that's not a guarantee, so that's what
man said, well I don't know the time, I might die tomorrow basically, don't have the time
exactly.
Exactly.
So after that exchange, the David that goes on, you have gone forth for a young, a light of
black hair, and that was blessing of youth in the kind of life without having doubted
those sensual pleasures, enjoy human sensual pleasures, cook, do not abandon what is directly
visible in order to pursue a takes time, he responds, I have not abandoned what is directly
visible in order to pursue a takes time, I have abandoned what takes time in order to pursue
what is directly visible, but the blessed one's friend has stated that sensual pleasures
are time consuming, full of suffering, full of despair, and the danger in them is still
greater, while the Dhamma is directly visible immediately, inviting one to come and see
applicable to me personally experienced by the wise, so it's kind of like saying that
even like, you know, seeing the Dhamma, practicing renunciation even, it just happens there
right now instead of going out and finding it through all the work.
Well, in the first business, the Dhamma has been timeless, but it literally is visible directly,
not involving time, obviously going forward into the ordaining and in the part of the
Armstrong, whatever he is doing, that takes time, but that's not the Dhamma, the actual
thing of the Dhamma is the most direct visible thing, one can develop, which is why it
can abroot everything else, it does involve time, such as sensuality, but it still takes
in a sense, practice of Dhamma takes time, but Dhamma doesn't, because it's all there.
Well, exactly, it's simultaneously present basically, for as long as your aggregate's
present, so it doesn't pertain, it abroots the aggregates, it doesn't depend on them,
like everything else, which you do, there would be all time.
So then the day it says confused, how is it that the blessed one in the state, it's sensual
pleasure like that, how is the Dhamma like that?
So many says, I knew your Dhamma not long gone forth, you cannot explain in detail, but
the blessed one going here, you can ask me about this matter, David's elements, it isn't
easy for us to approach the blessed one, as he is surrounded by other than, David says
it's a great influence, so somebody says, okay, I'll go ask and you come along with me,
so he goes to the blessed one and reports the entire discussion, and says that this is
where it gets kind of interesting, but more interesting, not the last part was interesting.
Let's see, the David doesn't ask, somebody to ask the blessed one, I was writing that
conversation, and the blessed one says these two verses, beings who perceive what can be
expressed, become established and what can be expressed, not fully understanding what
can be expressed, they come under the depth, but having fully understood what can be
expressed, one does not conceive one who expresses, for that does not exist for him by which
one could describe him, so this even a long time ago struck me as a two verses very kind
of full of meaning, and it was only recently, only got into discussing things like, you
know, designations and stuff, it's kind of like, oh, it's kind of clicking, isn't it?
Yes, it seems like to be the first, that which is expressed, that which can be designated,
you can just hope that it says the same, to basically the extent of the name in regard
to the matter, which is the extent of the all.
So the issue is not perceiving what can be expressed, it's going to be everyone, but it's
becoming established.
Yeah, assuming, developing assumptions of POMDAT, which is expressed, whether it's like
the different types of conceivings in and out, apart from a different and the same, doesn't
matter, it's in regard to it.
So that's the problem there, but the name is never a problem, there never was, never
matters, not that the issue is not in there, so for example, sometimes people try to deny
the designation, try to deny the name, and then you may be, well, I'm sure you heard
that in America, I heard a lot of it in England, from people among saying, oh, it's just a
conventional reality, conventional truth and all of that.
Yeah, yeah, it's like, well, you can designate whichever you want it, it's a present experience
and it's really such.
So a conventional reality, and again, there is also a quite a serious contradiction
containing that, but they're not worried, when you say, there's just conventional reality,
as opposed to the ultimate reality, well, you just designated the ultimate reality in the
same manner you designated the conventional reality, which means ultimate reality is also
conventional reality.
Well, do you mean by the same way?
Well, do you name it, how are you calling it, oh, it's inexpressible, are you just
expressive, by calling it inexpressible?
So the any way of relation will be relation through name and matter, that it can't be
the other way, but people then want to replace name with something greater than the name
and the day used to it, but it's greater only in relation to what they're used to.
After a while, that would be the conventional norm.
Yeah, the context I usually heard the most regarding self, like, you know, they'd say, oh,
you know, we'd talk about myself, they're just convention, the other reality is there
is no self.
Yeah, yeah, exactly, yeah.
And that's what your self is at the time, so it's all the denial of self.
It's a very cruel angle, yeah, but it's, yeah, very, very cruel.
Becoming established in what can be expressed, basically means assuming it for a stop, making
assumptions.
Yeah, yeah, bottom line, that can result in that.
Well, in this use, which is a cost, you can deny, you can say that second, you can say
that's, primary, you can say that's not real, you can say that's real.
All of those things are, when you refer to that name, to that which can be expressed apart
from yourself, basically, you leave yourself, you become the center of the expression.
You become defined by it, by sort of placing the attitude of assumption upon it, whether
like this or like that, both denied it doesn't matter.
One matter is yourself is assumed, separate from it, independent of it.
So that's fundamentally what assumption means, and why it's a problem and b, why it allows
for self-view to be fielded, because an assumption like that is such that ignores one's self,
so to say.
Yeah.
So like, for example, the one I thought about a lot is guarding, you know, matter, I would
think of all, you know, right?
It ignores, it ignores, not a set of one's self, it ignores the ownership of one's self.
Like as you just said, people can say, there is no self, so they can really think about
it and not self, but they own that.
That thought.
Yeah, which means that's where their self is, self is where the ownership is.
It's like, receiving not self with self.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So like, for example, we could say the same thing with the matter, like, conceiving or assuming
about the matter of those two parts.
Well, conceiving, you can regard as subtler than assumption, but it's the same movement,
so to speak.
Right.
So conceiving is a result of assumptions.
When there are assumptions, means conceiving are there, then, yeah, you can be free from
course assumptions, is to have some conceiving of a subtle nature, but that's like, anagamiara
and sort of, yeah, we're about that later.
So like, if that matter, then, for example, we can have the assumption that, oh, the thought
I have of matter is that actual matter, that's an assumption.
I guess what's not very clear to me is, okay, I can make that assumption, but how is
that connected to my view of myself?
Well, by, see, by conceiving the matter, in such manner, by giving it a being, here we
can deal with, by giving it a being.
Yeah.
That's what you're responsible for, but matter is, by you thinking that thought is what
the matter is, means that thought that you had, that you think the matter is, is what
matter is, in your experience, you don't have the real, reference to real matter, or,
well, almost a real matter, as opposed to that standard, that's real, your assumption
is real, your assumption is real as such, and it's what, how matter exists at the time
for you, so you gave the being, that's what matter finds footing, so you give the being
to the matter, through the assumption, that's what, that's what the, uh, upadhanapache
baab, baab, direct result of your assumption is, how things exist for you.
And I know you wrote a whole essay on this, but this is of course different from things,
like, what's the worst, it like matter is, but that's different from saying that there
is being, from assumption of matter, baab, well no, that's what matter is, like, you, you
thinking now, oh, there is, there's my assumption of matter, and then there is real matter,
there is no real matter for you, whenever you think matter, you assume matter, the only
way you cannot assume matter is to stop conceiving it, and then that experience would be, the
experience of like, uh, the five aggregates free from upadhanapache, but now you, you still
think that you have a clear thought of what matter is, but you fail to see that that
thought stands for that which is the matter is, so you end up conceiving it, with a secondary
thought, not with the first one, so matter is, you can say that, means matter is assumed
because it is, but there's not like no matter, really, no, it's here again, that's the
denial of the matter, so again, that's also a negative one being, there is no of this
matter, so like, for example, when we ever talk about, I feel like I'm going to say the
EI is the fleshly organ in the world by which there is vision, so when I think of that
I, it's never the I, it's always the thoughts, exactly, but now see, when you say that, now
you already imply with your peripheral thoughts that something else, another thought is that
I, so no thoughts is the I, exactly, the I is I, the thought is thought, so you can have
a thought of the I, you can tell it whichever you want, as long as that thought does not
imply the conceiving of the I, the I does not find a footing in that thought as it's, as
it's existing there, so that's the whole point, clearing these domains from confusion, from
the assumptions of overlap, the assumptions of mixing, the assumptions of finding footing
in it, you don't need to deny or affirm anything, you just have to think your thoughts, feel
your feelings and perceive your perceptions, and these three are separate things, simultaneously
present always, but not the same, and certainly cannot be mixed or interfere with each other,
so I can think about the, that's the fleshly organ in the world by which there is vision
you know I want, but it's never the I, exactly, but even when you make a statement that it's
never the I, never will be, make sure that that statement then does not imply through
the peripheral background, some other less defined thought that's assumed to be that
real I, and that's just a matter of, so you then know, you end up only being able to,
you end up being able to only know that you're only going to think your thoughts, nothing
else, but that's possible because the real matter, the matter, and itself, it's present
there, but when you have clarity of these thoughts, then the thought that matter that's present
there, because of which I'm able to think about matter or anything else, you won't be
conceiving it, because you reach the clarity, because you see that they're entirely separate
of the limits.
Yes, you will have enough of the mindfulness span, so to speak, that no peripheral background
can introduce more confusion, because the matter is clear to you, literally, pun intended
there, because the point is, when you, as I said, when you make a statement or you're
thinking, oh, well, this is not that which matter is, that's fine, but the mind hasn't
been developed to kind of not lose the span, so to speak, which means that without a sufficient
span, you're going to assume that some other thought is then the real matter.
But when you know that the matter is there, and that thought doesn't stand for that because
of which that thought that matter is there is there, then you find it, and you don't have
to go further, no, you have to stop short, and this kind of thing, that's completely unraveling
of your thinking in a sense of freeing it from any assumptions and conceiving.
And that's developed by the repetition, oh yeah, thinking in that way.
So it's still, I think, correct me from wrong, good direction to say, you know, my thought
of the eye is not the eye, but then I also have to take it as far as it needs to go as well.
Oh yeah, absolutely.
I'm not saying that's the wrong thing to do, I'm just saying you have to keep taking it further,
because often people would say that, and then, okay, that's clear, it's clear only when
it's unraveled.
It's going to be really infinity of that direction one, though.
So basically, when you make a statement, oh, this thought is not there because of which
the thought is there, this thought is not that matter, then just, you then even have to
kind of go in a fully defined thought.
You just need to remain mindful of the peripheral attitude of your mind then, to kind of fall
into something else, no matter how non-defined that else might be.
Sounds like a very subtle thing.
It is, it is just like a habit of mine to take this, to take that.
So when you take this, then you recognize it, that this cannot be that, what you take
and it to be, what you took it to be.
But then you just make sure, okay, now that's it, don't overdo it, don't like find something
else then to not take, let it persist for as long as one's persist as such thought, that
this is not that because of which matter is.
And then you find your mind falling into something else and then you do it, you do it.
The point is, you do it and then leave it while it's being present as something that's
done.
So you just basically remain mindful.
But not like I've just been mindful, you can be mindful, anybody can be mindful, but
you need to set it up properly, have a right thought, right intention and then be mindful
while it lasts off it.
It seems then it's almost like in a way, it could be described as being aware of multiple
things like in terms of, you know, you're on one hand aware of the need for there to
be materiality, for there to be thoughts of senses and thoughts of forms or whatever.
At the same time, recognizing that view of yours, of the eye, that, you know, flashy
elemental external, how do you want to call it, thing, even that's still not your eye,
you need to see the infinity of where that direction is going, it seems like multiple things.
So you can say that's still not my eye and then you will find your mind automatically
assuming something else is and that's what you need to discern as a that peripheral
assumption, not make it into another thing and say, no, that's also not my eye because
then your mind will peripherally assume something else is, which means when I say peripheral
it means it's like a negative thought, it's not, it doesn't, it doesn't become a positive
center of your attention and you need to see it as such as a negative thought, not to
make it a positive center of attention because then something else would be a negative
thought in regard to that.
So that's what I mean, like to set it up and then leave it for as long as it lasts,
so kind of keep bringing it and making it positive, making it positive because the
extra negative thought in regard to that, it's always going to remain obscure.
It's like like trying to, trying to set up, set up like a balance or something and then
it sort of, it falls and then oh, it stands a bit longer, it stands a bit longer, actually
this stands pretty well, I need something that won't stay, this is everything stays
there, okay this will be tricky, so say you're trying to balance and it falls, but then
you set it up and then oh, last it for a second, last it for, and then it stays, stays,
stays, stays, and then falls, but then it stays, so you don't interfere while it is staying,
that's the point, if you just keep making positive, like assuming that only the positive
thought is a thought you need to be thinking, then that's the problem, then basically you
never allow balance to set, because you would be doing this intentionally bringing that,
you put it back up, and then if you actually want to stay on its own, you pick it up and
put it again, you pick it up and put it, you pick it up, no pick it up, let it fall, then
put it up, let it fall and pick it up and then stays, stays a bit longer, then don't
pick it up, it's for the longs and stays, then when it falls, you do the same, pick it
up again, but not just like picking it up, picking it up, picking it up, because then
you wouldn't even discern what a balance is, so same principle as when you're like just
doing things, you're mindful of like let's say your body in a peripheral way, yeah, it's
really like an anchor basically, are you anchored in the background so that you can actually
keep seeing this thing, if it's in the balance, and if it's not, okay, let me set it up,
now it's probably, probably, probably, but it's still considered upward, and that's it,
you don't have to interfere with it, the same you set up the thought, this thought can
only be the thought, not that because of which this thought is there, and your mind
latched, okay, did it again, but then you won't latch so quickly every time, sometimes
it will still, that thought that you just thought, as a thought, not as then because of
which the thought is there, is still there, that's fine, just be mindful of that, that's
already practiced a proper meditation as well, wait for the background, look at it, discerning,
still there, still the same thing is there, it's fine, it's fine, you don't have to wait
for it to end, no it's okay, just relax now, it's still up, and then you find your mind,
oh, it's not up anymore, so every change that speak is abrupt, as I know you're saying,
so you won't find the moment when it's not set up anymore, you just want to find it's gone,
so that's why most people have actually no sense of a recognition of the notion of enduring
persistent or changing, and that's what the mind development is, because arising is
persisting while changing that is increasing, ceasing is persisting while changing that is decreasing,
which means all you want to have is different directions of enduring things, arising and
ceasing in regard to your thoughts and feelings and perceptions, so the point is to train your mind
in regard to that, because the balance is there, then you don't have to interfere, not knowing
what the balance is, you'll just keep doing everything in nothing, and you certainly wouldn't
know how to set it up, that's why, oh, he can obtain first, you know, John is at will,
yeah, because he fully understood it, he can just think it, and he enters it,
it's hard for me to wrap my head around the ideas, both like a positive and negative thought,
yeah, it takes training, it takes repetition, training of the mind to start discerning it,
you can't visualize the negative, because you're visualizing positive, which means that
has something else's negative in regard to it, so while you're visualizing, you start
discerning the background of that visualization, without that thought, without making it then
the central, because then something else would be the peripheral, if we use this example in terms
of consciousness, let's say, you know, okay, there are things named in the form, one can't even
really make consciousness positive, impossible, it's the ultimate negative, one makes consciousness
positive through basically appropriating it, that's how consciousness gets established as it says
in the surface, but actually in its nature, yeah, consciousness is the ultimate, that's why for an
argument, what's that translation, the non-indicative consciousness, basically means consciousness,
it doesn't point to anything anymore, which means that consciousness is inconceivable,
that's why it's, you know, the mind is liberated, it doesn't, doesn't set, doesn't get
established upon anything, that has appeared, anything on how we're bigger small is just left for what it is,
but there's still like awareness of things, well yeah, but even the awareness belongs to those
things, those phenomena, then there's a reason, not to your end of the stick, which there isn't
your end of the stick, there is, well, there is a sense of self, a sense of me, but when that's
abandoned, then there isn't, but in terms of like establishing mindfulness in that kind of
direction, so like, you know, things appear, I can be aware of that, that positive things
sites, whatever, but in the, I guess it's a fact of my mind, somehow not making it a positive
thought of consciousness, the mind can be trained to be aware that these things are only there,
because there is a, what do you mean not making it a positive thought of consciousness?
Like if I'm looking at things I'm saying, I make a positive thought saying, oh I can only see
these because there is consciousness, like making it a thought and then assuming the thought is
the consciousness. Oh right, yeah, don't do that, but you can still in the, you know, sense,
know that there can only be things because there is consciousness. Yeah, so you can discern,
you can know what consciousness is, but then that, that's why the suit as it says there,
consciousness is to be fully understood. So it's identifying consciousness within your
experience. Consciousness is where understanding is. The consciousness that has been liberated
from many assumptions and conceding in the same sense of the matter that has been liberated
from considering is the nature or the experience of understanding.
As in everything that appears understood. The nature of things.
Yes, understood, the fire aggregates, yeah. But you're still always trying to explain it
yourself, which is fine, but you make sure you don't settle on the explanation.
The point is, when I said you have to develop your mind in regard to the
phenomena of things enduring as they have risen, that means basically the center of the experience,
of your experience is not in you or only you or with you or yours, it's basically in that which
is enduring at the time, whatever attention, whatever that thing might be, whether it's a thought,
feeling or perception, as that upon which your attention is set up and you're mindful of,
that is the center of your experience. From there you infer subtly, implicitly sense of self
and sense of ownership and everything, but only because thing has a reason first beforehand.
You'll find it there, that's what I mean. So the center of the experience basically
slowly shifts on to the actual arising and ceasing. The five aggregates, the nature is to rise,
having the reason, the nature is to cease. But both, arising is manifest, cessation is manifest.
Remember the center shifts to that. The center from your sense of self shifts on to the center
of arising of things. Because now it's me and things that are around me and they're happening to me,
but that center me exists only because you own things that happen to you,
which means it's not a center. Because it's dependent, it's actually, it's dependent upon
ownership of things that arise on to the core. But myself is not a center. Yeah, it's just layered over things.
It plastered over it.
It's even plastered over.
Like for instance. Well, yourself that feels like I sent myself, my sense of self right here,
that is, it's really such. But you want to see that that's a mistake. You want to approve it by
seeing that this very center of self, the real center of self, depends upon ownership of these
things is not my center. That cannot be my center. Yet my center depends upon that, which means,
oh, well, that's no really. When I say the center, the center implies the mass,
the puppeteer, the string puller, the one who controls all of it.
When you're saying center, you're saying control.
Yeah, of course. That's what sense of self is. The center of the experience, the main hub.
I was getting confused in terms like the mind being central related to the senses,
but still not.
Oh, right, right, right, right. Well, that could correspond, which is why people assume
myself is my mind. Similar, but that's a different thing. I'm talking about the actual, just
sense of center, the sense of self implies right here as opposed to everywhere else.
But it's everywhere else. I, the experience as a whole that has to rise first and endure
such from like, and through like a constant ignorant habits and assumptions, you develop,
you assume the center here to which things happen.
Without understanding that the reason things are more fundamental.
Yes, structurally precede the center, not temporarily.
Yes. So it's while the center is here, president has to see it, while it's there,
as dependent upon that, which cannot be that center.
And then even that ceases to be that master center.
So then with the grounds to rising and ceasing, it's one one's seeing that in terms of like,
like, make things arise, see, you know, become more present, less present,
endure, I don't know where I'm going, I'm just confused.
Well, yeah, it's not, you can't, you can't, you can explain it yourself, you can get the
intellectual idea of it, but they won't make you understand it. And like, that's true for everything,
but with this, particularly, that's why nobody understands it. That's why people even,
often they don't even say, arising, ceasing, persisting while changing, they say,
arising, enduring, ceasing. They change your order, because the thing doesn't matter.
It absolutely matters. Because if you say arising, enduring, ceasing, I mean,
no, you're just witnessing things arising, and then persisting for a while, and then disappearing
externally, and you leave yourself entirely out. And you also fail to see that whether it's
arising, whether it's ceasing, that in itself is manifested, that in itself is already
arising, like cessation is manifested in your experience. It means it has a reason as such,
as cessation. How else are you going to know it? If you, if you actually, understanding of your
experience means understanding of components, which means understanding of the actual
cessation of things, as if in a sense, when you look at, look at the, I don't know.
Right, I understand that, like, you don't watch things get destroyed.
Exactly, because you can't, you can't do that to yourself, man. Which means eventually,
then we'll be impossible, and while you're alive. So then what you're basically?
So you, and you don't, you don't have to also look, well, where is the arising?
Where is the arising? There's always something there. Like, even now, you already have thoughts,
feelings, moods, perceptions, so take a big plenty of things to establish a mindfulness
upon, and to discern the their enduring. And you can say, the far aggregates are enduring.
Each of them, independent of each other, are simultaneous enduring. The form is enduring,
the feelings are enduring, the perceptions are enduring, the determination are enduring,
and the consciousness is enduring. Far the main, five heaps, simultaneous, the present,
act. But heaps, they don't blend it to one much, they remain independent heaps. That's why it heaps.
So then, through grants to those, you know, you can see them persisting. How, how is it that
one can discern them as arising? Are they increasing in their persistence or are they decreasing
in their persistence? They are arising or they are ceasing? Increasing in persistent.
Yes, the endurance is like failing in. Is it increasing in his presence? Or is decreasing
in his presence? Do you say that in a matter of attending to it or is that a different thing?
No, no, no, no. That's how you find it. Like, say you pick a feeling. Is that feeling?
Is it, okay, it's present, no doubt about it. But is it increasing? Is it going to be more of the
same feeling? Or is it kind of failing out? So it's still the same feeling, still like the identity
of the same feeling, but is it increasing or is it decreasing in his presence? It's a strength.
Exactly, the intensity of it. And that's where you're referring to the particular things.
Well, you don't pick particular things and do that, because I mean myself doing this
thing. No, you find that in your experience already, which means you always have to start
with the experience as a whole. That becomes the particular thing. Is there in all this within
that field? Yeah, I suppose. On the basis of that field. So first you have to basically learn
how to be mindful of the experience as a whole. Nothing specific. Just experience as a whole.
Like me sitting in the room on the chair holding a book. Well, as such, but it's not as specific
as if you were to just be mindful of you holding a book. I'm like intensely focusing on my
holding a book. Yeah, don't do that. Or don't like look for things out there to do the practice
I'm just describing. That's when you start with experience as a whole, and then within that
a particular thing might emerge. But even if they don't, that can then be your particular thing.
The non-emergence of anything. Yeah. Just in the room. And that is enduring, exactly.
And in the same level, so to speak, you will find feelings as moods, as like mind shapes,
so to speak, expanded, depressed, elated, light, heavy, time, full of energy. All of those
are basically states of your mind that you discern as such. It's a you who is depressed or you
who is elated. Just for mind is elated. The mind is depressed. The mind is blinded.
Oh, the mind is invisible. Oh, the mind is very visible.
You can desert whichever one. If you start discerning the mind like that, it will stand for that,
which the mind is, which you're discerning. And then it's enduring as such. So you can be going
throughout your day, but the mind is still in this depressed mood, don't matter. And then you see,
again, when you reattend the same depressed mood, then you find it, it's weakening, so to speak.
Okay. So you're not doing anything. It's just the mind. The mood of the mind is fading out.
It's ceasing. And that the current without any of anything on your part?
Absolutely. And then, oh, next thing you know, you get distracted. Then you reattend your mind
where it was. And then it's actually quite peaceful, my mind now. That has, oh, is this peace now
coming over? Oh, yeah, yeah. It's a new thing. It's increasing. You can do that with anything.
Absolutely. But you want to do it with mind, with feelings, because those things are the ones that
matter. And if you do it on that level means the mind is sufficiently developed. And then obviously,
yeah, it can do it with anything. You tend to find it at an increasingly increasing.
You know, I don't want to only do all this with very few.
Well, yeah, but in order to try to do it rightly, you can get the right view.
The grasping the sign of the mind is a prerequisite for the right view.
And that's exactly what it means. You can't see your mind in any state if you have absolutely
no sign of the phenomenon of the mind, not even a remodeling of the shape of it. But you start
discerning that. Okay, there you go. And are we, are we getting into a kind of a different
approach here from senses for this thing? Well, yeah, I wouldn't worry about the approach of senses
of, I mean, you can use anything for your practicing or your reflection. But no matter about
approach, you're coming to, you have, he has to start on the basis of mindfulness of the experience
as a whole. And that's the thing coming to anything. Yeah, because that is the starting point.
Like say, say things have proliferated mistakenly. So you want to bring it back to the point
that's kind of good enough close to the point when it doesn't matter what proliferation is.
And that point is experience as a whole. But if you start even picking right to
the base upon the right instruction or attend to this or attend to this, but you attend it further
down the line after things have proliferated. You won't work there. You won't take the root.
And when I say, like attend the means exactly what I said before, you have to start with experience
as a whole not just pick an object within already a non-mindful experience as a whole.
So you discern the object within the experience as a whole. You don't pick the object on top of
the experience as a whole. So it's a different direction. Please enter again. You discern the object
within the experience as a whole that you're mindful of. Within that, then you discern the object
without losing the mindfulness of the experience as a whole. So that's the opposite direction from
the direction of our pick and object without the basis of the experience as a whole. So you don't
pick it, you find it. You step into it, so to speak. So those two simultaneous things, a
particular general positive negative, you want to say it? Yeah, but the order does matter.
Because you know, I can have a, I can, like, there you go. I can be, I can be attending to this
table and the things on the table. So that's a particular thing. But then within that, I can be
attending with the cup at the top of the table. So now the cup is more particular than the other
particular thing. But really, they're all particular things because I'm forgetting about myself.
Yourself and your situation. Exactly. So that's why that proliferation
matters. You need to find a place, bring it back, where you include yourself, which is
experience as a whole. Why? Because it's the proliferation that takes that sense of self out
and then leaves it intact. No matter what reflection you do. Oh, yeah, this cup is impermanent.
This cup is mine. It's very dear to me. And so on and so forth. But it's impermanent. It's
made of this. It's made of that. You left yourself out again. But if you find yourself in
the experience as a whole, sitting in this room, thinking about this cup, that it's very dear
and precious gift that was given to me, which it isn't by the way. Just for example. Then,
okay, so you start with yourself as the basis. And within that, you discern the object of
their value. And in that direction, reflection can go. But not just go out. Forget it by
yourself. That's why experience as a whole mindfulness of it needs to come first.
So when we say it's situation, it implies you always. It should. Because you are always in
this situation. But the situation is not any particular thing. Exactly. I am sitting. Exactly.
Situation is just experience as a whole. The thing is a whole. And that can be anything else of
all. Yeah. Whatever you are. Whatever you do. Whatever you think. Whatever you feel.
That's part of the experience as a whole that's already there. The presence of the five
hundred years. That's the situation. And it doesn't matter. I'm saying, oh, this is the feeling
there's the perception. No, it doesn't matter. You can discern that within that situation then.
And then you would actually be discerning that which feeling is. As opposed to just assuming
and thinking, then attending upon your assumption of what you think the feeling is.
That's what I mean. You find those things in the experience. Once experience as a whole
has been brought up, brought up to light with mindfulness sufficient amount of time.
But without that as a basis, you're not actually fishing in the right pond to speak.
Yeah, I can think of the words experience as a whole and situation, but I've only been
maybe a few times or I was like, oh, this might actually be what that means. Otherwise,
it's always a kind of a vague thing what that might be. Yeah. And it is. It would be a vague
experience because it's basically like mind waking up. Mind for being constantly absorbed in things.
Just waking up. That's where some people, that's where people like, you know, they come across it.
Even people with a wrong view just experiences a whole mindfulness. And the minds are blown away
by it because they never used to it. They spiritualize it. They mystify it. And then you can see that
often here that certainly and it's kind of the pinnacle of every teaching and every religion.
You just be here now. Be mindful. The pure presence, the pristine awareness.
You just mystify mindfulness of experience as a whole. But that in itself means nothing.
As you can see by all the different teachers and people that talk lots of stuff,
that doesn't actually lead anywhere. Anybody can be mindful. That's what I say. Like,
you need to know what you're supposed to look for. So yes, absolutely. Mindfulness comes first.
You can never have too much mindfulness. But that in itself, it certainly not the end. That's just
the beginning. For most people, that's where the practice ends. Just spend your rest of your life
just be here now. Mind, whatever judgment-free, your mind is a present, pristine awareness,
all those things. Just do that. Just do that. And then what? That's it. Just do that.
And it'll work kind of eventually. Exactly, by itself, but it won't, of course. And it doesn't.
Then you just end up revolving around more sophisticated around beings, or not even so sophisticated.
The point is mindfulness is not the end. It's the beginning of your practice.
So yes, start with that pristine awareness, which is a contradiction in terms. It doesn't matter.
Calling whatever you want, do it. And then within that, start discerning what you're supposed to know,
which is what it's supposed to tell you. But don't use the subject just to come to that experience
and then mystify yourself. Because the feelings need to be understood. The thoughts need to be
understood. The perception needs to be understood. I wouldn't understand that if you just sort of
you don't see what's surrounding. Exactly. If you're just kind of frozen in this ecstatic,
not even ecstatic, just this neither here nor there, all around luminous presence of my pristine
awareness, and then what, great. But if you actually don't forget that you're supposed to understand
these things, then it becomes just up. This is just mindfulness. Mindfulness of experience is out.
Sure, feels light, feels luminous, feels whatever, in the comparison to like stage before,
stage of non-mindfulness. You're going to say people are not mindful of it as if you've already
lived. That's all true. But that's what mindfulness is. So you kind of wake up to do the work,
not wake up and celebrate the you woke up and you haven't done any work,
which is what most spiritual practice is after that. It is great for gratitude and
easing, but not, but no work done. Just we reach this song. Look, we can be mindful.
So no wonder now people try to take the mindfulness and apply it,
like speaking to the psychiatrists the other day in Kenya. And they were saying there's a whole
movement, and I know there was an event in England, this whole movement of applying mindfulness.
I like, not in a religious context, not in a Buddhist context, just the mindfulness for this
mindfulness. Is this? Yeah, great. They call it mindfulness based stress therapy. Oh yeah,
yeah, even any chest in England, national health, national health system, even they started
doing courses in mindfulness therapy, place them. It's fine, I mean sure, mindfulness is always
better than non-mindfulness, but don't mistake mere mindfulness for understanding of the dhamma
and being free from suffering. That's basically my point. If someone says it's great,
but often it is, obviously people think it's the goal. That's it. That's the goal of the whole
practice to be here now, present. You are already now, present. Where do you want to be or not?
You don't have to make any effort to be present because you're not sure about it.
So you can just become aware of it, and then you can either go mystical or you can become aware of it,
and soon as okay, now I have to do the work. It's not on my way. And then you do the work,
and the work is understanding. You investigate in the meaning, not leaving anything unturned,
as many ways in the world it would put it. And when it's understood then yet, you can't help
but not be mindful of this name. I think an important criteria for myself is recognizing
if a thought I'm having is a description versus an explanation. That can also be determined
whether you're mindful of it or not. If you're mindful of it properly means you're not losing the
base of the experience as a whole, which means then it's a description. But you can have the same
thought, but it's baseless, and then it's an explanation. So when we say explanation, that basically
means almost like abstract. It becomes abstract, it becomes abstracted from the base that's
non-existent. The base in mindfulness is always exactly. That's what I was saying, I think in one
of the talks with Tanya, I was telling that abstract is basically your attitude, not necessarily the
content. So you can think something right as an explanation, but it's not the anonymous. Exactly.
Because in you're not recognizing the situation which you're having a abstract thought.
Yeah, if you were to reestablish the mindfulness and have the same abstract thought, it will
cease to be abstract. Because now it's actually standing for that which it represents.
That's why I say, when Biko Bodhi, he says in his translations,
all, when this is the first line, it's just an abstract principle.
And then he goes on explaining the rest of the things about it differently. It's an abstract
principle only because you don't understand it, hence it's abstracted. So far from dismissing
something because it's abstract, that you just tell you that actually you don't understand it.
So you should understand it where it ceases to be abstract. So when you read all this,
when the Buddha describes the state of mind and whatever else, the people usually all
these are abstract or something, it's abstract because you have no clue what he's talking about.
So you have to find out and then he won't be abstract. The element of worth, the casino worth,
the casino based, the casino that, for most people just abstract, there's absolutely no idea
what he's referring. But that doesn't mean that the actual content is abstract. This means
the minds are so far abstracted from that they have no concept of it.
So when we're doing it properly, like in terms of descriptions, if the one who used that word,
that's supposed to affect the nations, it means that we have that background where we have awareness
of it and then we've been back. Exactly. And of course I can say that it's easy enough to say.
It's easy enough to say, but it's hard to repeat its efficient amount of times, but it's not
impossible. And it's not hard in terms of, oh crap, how can I be mindful of the experiences of
everybody, can you guys, a lot of the experiences of all, nothing specific, just on the end now,
you can start with that, if you want. Within that, then without losing that, you have to develop
this element. And that's just repetition. And by losing that, we get absorbed, it's
absorption, like wrongly. Yeah, yeah, yeah. You lose it basically. It's easy to be the basis of your
description, of your reflection, of your investigation, of your meditation. It's easy to be that,
which means you fall in of the right base. You're not looking at the right place. You might be
all looking at the same thing, but from a completely wrong angle. And then angle is angle that's not
rooted, not established on the right base, of mindfulness of the experiences of all.
Because you say, I'm mindful of the experience of all, and you can know, you might not know what's
specifically, but you know, whatever they would have talked about in the suit, however abstract or
not, is to be found within this mindfulness of the experience as a whole, just depending how far
you take your mind within there. It's not left right up or down, internal external, it's within this.
This is why I recorded these things. Yeah, no, this is absolutely. I mean,
nobody could remember this. You remember it? Well, I don't remember it. I'm just speaking from
the same place. So we'll just come up the same way every time, but if you'd asked me to repeat
now what I said, I couldn't repeat in the same way. No possible.
It's funny that the thought said always, not always, but the rise of others, it's kind of a
surprise. That's the word he is, trepidation. Kind of like, well, I don't know if I can even do this,
it's also, don't. Yeah. But then it's kind of like, you know, it's fairly could be like, well,
okay, maybe, maybe not yet, so try. That's the most important attitude to develop
or to abandon. For Tunisists, to recognize that this is not out of my reach, because most people
would just dismiss it off. Yeah, well, even if it's too much, there doesn't mean you have to,
you should not do it. You might get closer to it, so next time won't be too much. Either way,
everyone goes to waste, but it's not too much. You were born as you were lucky enough, you had
enough good merit to be born as a human. So you've done enough good in the past to have
intact faculties. You've done a good, good in the past to have intact intellect, so that's
something that excuse them. You're a reason that we're human being with operating faculties and
operating mind. That has time, relatively speaking. Absolutely, no, no, no, no, that's a perfect
requirement. If you were there, you would be more unfortunate. If you're not human, you'd be
more unfortunate. If you're lower than human. So you realize actually, no. And then again,
as I said, everybody can be mindful. So you don't have to worry in Tunisists to memorize that
whole canon or understand every little end of their point, and they were talking about, no,
so just his ways, he would come out when he would be describing the same experience, experience
of the right view. There are other people might describe, well, they can serve it differently,
but he wouldn't mean different things. It means the same. They can just explain differently,
or not so detailed. Because many, many, even in the sutras, they would have said,
you know, they can be an ara, but he has no gift of speech, no gift of explanation. He can still
explain, but not to the vast group of people, to diversify his explanation, because he just
doesn't have those capacities. But it doesn't mean that he does not have the meaning of his explanation.
If he weren't, he wouldn't be an ara. So everybody can be mindful of the experience as a whole,
and you know, that's where you're supposed to look. That's where you start. And you're not actually
trying to accomplish anything in terms of understanding all of this and feeling it all out.
All you're trying to accomplish is become impermeable to suffering. And that's done on the
basis of the mindfulness of the experience of the whole. For overshoulders, nothing else.
You understand that? You understood all of it. Because everything is within that.
As in discerning what is suffering, origin, in? Being free from it. This story we were about
four. Just think about one. Completely free. Free, directly and free peripherally. It means
free from possibility to suffer as well. There is even, I have some hard in. I don't know if I am
I currently like suffering. Exactly. But then you ask yourself, well, yeah, okay, maybe not now,
because maybe now a Neutrophilic is present. But it's a point. Exactly. Am I completely free from
any liability towards suffering? And you can know that for sure. And you can know that for sure.
No, I know we are. Exactly. So that's actually the criteria, not whether you suffer right here or
right now. But whether you can't suffer. And that's all you have to do. That's really nothing.
It's kind of interesting that it went from talking about sense footage to something. That kind of
as you would guess, the verb is like, I don't get it. And then the book that it games in another
verse. It's kind of similar. One who conceives, I am equal, I am better, I am worse. My own
countervedic gauge and disputes was not shaken in the three discriminations does not think I am
equal or better. So at that point, it's kind of like it's less, he's getting less and less subtle
with his verses. Even still, it's a pretty subtle verse in the day, but it doesn't get that one in it.
And all of you, of course, I am in the first place. I have to be if I can be better or worse than whatever.
Exactly. Doesn't matter better, I'm equal, I'm better, I'm worse. You are. Means you're taking
yourself to be, means you are centered in that center, I was talking about. And for as long as that,
that's the case, they will be disputes, they will be of sense, they will be suffering.
The first day that that does understand is the abandoning, reckoning did not assume conceit.
He cut off craving here for name and form. The day does in human search for him here and beyond
the heavens are all the bones. They do not find one who's not or cut the one untroubled free of longing.
So that not finding is because they don't even identify the center of the experience of their self
and whether it disowned that. So that kind of way, they don't exist anymore.
You can't, no, because they will apply to things to do this.
So it's gone beyond. It can't be consumed. It's gone beyond the duality. Sure.
But in that is a formal designation then, there can be misunderstood if one of my flow,
or he has gone beyond that self position. Exactly. Like what's Argentinian service says,
they unbind it. The flame is not extinguished, it's unbound. Like he hasn't ceased there and now
gone. It's kind of gone, show somewhere else basically.
Some undiscoverable. Exactly.
inexpressible state. They should just explain it.
The designation really is a tango, isn't it?
Well, that's all there is, Mick. That's all the tango, is there?
Sure, no.
And then the day of the
finalized saying, when should not do any evil in the world, not face speech mind or body,
having abandoned certain pleasures mindful, could it come branding?
When should not pursue? Of course, it is painful and harmful.
Yeah, it doesn't just think how it kind of like when it's kind of many different directions from that one thing.
And even while I was a bit of like, I guess say something if he, I assume, knew the day that
it wouldn't get it. Well, it wouldn't get it.
Oh, no. I'll put it.
Didn't he have to have like certain people's minds?
Well, yeah, but it doesn't mean like you really know like every time it will take.
Otherwise, he wouldn't, he would teach only to people who became islands. But not everybody came
islands to listen to him. So it's a matter of choice for them as well.
So he knew that they were impossible to understand, which is why he kept trying.
He said, sometimes I teach some people and I give an instruction clearly and everything,
but they would do the opposite.
And like, well, I'm displeased and I can't imagine that.
But that feeling does not really take my mind, so I don't get upset.
I just don't know how I waste my time.
It has another suit, you've talked about some of them before, but I just said one particular question.
So is that suit that we're used to, but it talks about like one of your treat foods,
like they're a dear son in honor of desert and you think, but it wasn't so much the
similes so much. I don't know what it was. Yeah, it was. I mean, I'm just basic.
Like, the simile makes sense. It's fine. But just the idea of like,
neutriments. Like, okay, the food makes sense to you to nurture the body otherwise it'll
shrivel away nothing. But then the other, you know, three contacts, it depends on pollution,
I guess that's some car. Some car there. In consciousness.
So these are neutriments, obviously, only many units present.
You just have to say, you don't think about like when commentaries describe
a contact that's just coming together of three things, like you can watch it on a screen.
No, it means that the sense of self is there. So the sense of self depends upon being
contacted. If I think they're appropriated, that's why the verb is boosted. Yeah, being touched,
you know. But what is it they're nurturing? Sorry? Like, they're neutriments, but to what?
To the sense of self? To the sense of self. I am to appropriation to all it. If you not
touch is not appropriate. Yeah. So the whole thing depends on the fact that you're just being
touched constantly. And whatever results in that, like feeling,
intersections, all. Yeah. Yeah. I know that kind of thing. All nourished by that touch.
So it's kind of saying that in order to maintain a sense of self, there has to be
appropriated things, they nurture that sense of self. Yes. Absolutely. To put them more simply, it's
because you take things to be mine, your sense of self is maintained. You stop taking everything.
And I say take mentally only. Like not, as I said before, not going to destroy all the possessions,
because then obviously mental ownership was still remained. As we spoke before,
you remain here about your senses. And since you haven't discern what mental ownership as a
phenomenon is, even in regard to the objects, you're not going to certainly discern it then in
your senses when you when you thought that you free yourself from ownership by destroying the things
you want. So you want to discern the mental ownership. And then your sense of self is not maintained.
So in that way, those last three are a little different than edible food. Well, there's subtler.
So basically as long as there is a determination that's rooted in ignorance, there's going to be
the whole, but it's all part of the results in suffering and so on. And ultimately, the
ultimate determination and real sense consciousness. So as long as there is presence of things,
as long as things that arise, they will be suffering. You can say that. Again, all that means
when ignorance is there. One's ignorance is dispelled in regard to nature of manifestation,
nature of presence, nature of consciousness. Then there's no problem in there.
There's some similarities you mentioned before, like walking through the desert, eating your son,
that somebody with the cow like it stands. Oh, yeah, if it leans, if it sits, yeah, you don't
know the rest of it and use that in regards to contact, like whatever your contact with has the
potential to be devouring. Yeah, no, every one is divine. Because contact, what it means,
eminence, touched. You can only be touched when you're ignorant, which means the fact that
contact, even as a pleasant contact, is touching you, it's already divine.
So that's why central pleasures are actually painful, actually painful.
Denonite, the most refined contact, like nature contact. Yeah, yeah.
Well, not necessarily though. No, no, no. Well, theoretically, supposedly, say,
it's only without a right view, but yeah, you want to replace joy of jhana. You want to use joy of
jhana to replace joy of centrality. That's fine. I mean, relatively speaking. Ultimately, sure,
again, if ignorance is there, which can be, even the one who has jhana, yeah, they're still going
to be contacted. So from the ultimate point of view, you don't want contact at all. However,
refining contact in regards to the wholesome states, as opposed to the regard to the wholesome states,
can make you and certainly enable you to see contact, nature contact clearer and then feel
so from it. That's what along with jhana is, we need very little instruction. With two jhana
as jhana is, you only need 90% of the mind to get over it. So now it just needs to get together,
get a few bits, bits, bits, right, and that's it, then you'll know how to look at the whole thing
correctly. And there's two other similes for the other ones. How because should the
nature and mental evolution be seen? Suppose there's a charcoal pet deep in the man's height,
fill of going colds, man will come along wanting to live, not wanting to die, because our
captain is going to rest his suffering. Then two strong men would grab him and go far and drag him
towards the charcoal pit. A man's volition would be to get far away, his longing would be to get far
away. His wish would be to get far away from the charcoal pit, for what reason, because he knows
I will fall into this charcoal pit. I will meet with death and death and his suffering. It's in this way,
because that I say the naturement of mental evolution should be seen. I don't exactly understand the
connection there. Mental evolution, I think that's Chetan.
Is the naturement some car or Chetan? Well, Chetan is some car.
It's like a fundamental nature of determination, but Chetan is already the determination.
Yeah. So, yeah, basically, your intentions. Away from centrality is the same similarly,
use hunter woods and shrugs. Like putting your mind into a charcoal, like burning it,
but get the burning out, and your mind would be everywhere else except for it to be there.
Which means your mind has to stop wanting you, because simply by wanting centrality,
you are still within the mental centrality. Even if you're never engaging in it for the rest of your life,
but you're still feeding it. So one should not feed it. See, there's the most dangerous thing.
The intention to avoid it and overcome it. When it's there,
develop intention that you are not going there. Like you've been taken there,
oh, but no, you want to be everywhere else except there, and that's enough to not feed it.
Provided you stopped engaging in it by body and your senses beforehand.
Otherwise, it's just the critical. Otherwise, you won't make this happen.
That's why people can think of the dangerous centrality, but then they can't engage in it anyway.
Oh, yeah. And people, you can be like mugs of 40-50 years of practicing celibus and restrain,
and then the soul can go in and find a woman, because the mind has never left. Very scary.
Well, I suppose, yeah, as a possibility.
Is it the thing that one could fall into the trap?
Well, the trap is scary, sure. But the fact is that it's their own doing.
If you spend 50 years, not three years, they're from the world. You have nobody else to blame,
except yourself. It's not like that you were bound simply by a chance, and you had absolutely
nothing to do about it. You couldn't do anything about it. You just didn't know what,
because you didn't make the effort to find out.
I think, you know, the dastard helmets did that?
Just 10 perceptions of what I've done for it, huh?
I always thought about the last one that way, like, you know, you know, they did in my life.
Yeah, that won't be embarrassed. I just think, yeah, what if I'm like a, if I make it that far
30-year monk, and, you know, who asked, oh, what have you attained?
Then the last simile is a growing consciousness.
How would be kuzh, should the nutrition consciousness be seen?
Suppose they were to arrest bandit, criminal, and bring him before the king, saying,
sire, this man is a bandit, the criminal, can pose a name that or punishment to wish. It kings
us to them, go man in the morning, strike this man in the hundred spears, in the morning,
strike him in the hundred spears, then a new one, king asks, how's that man? Still alive,
then go, what needs to strike him in the hundred more spears, and so on and so forth.
What do you think be kuzh, would that man be struck with 300 spears,
experienced pain and displeasure on that count? And they say, even one spear would be bad,
never mind clear under the spears. In such a way, that nutrient of kuzh should be seen,
when that nutrient is understood, name and form is understood, when name and force will
be understood, there's nothing further than the most that it needs to do.
So that's going back to the idea of, so long as there is consciousness appropriated,
there's going to be the opportunity for pain and suffer.
Yeah, even the mere presence of things, presence hasn't been understood,
means things have been appropriated. And you won't start seeing that,
that very root basically of the experience, as being struck by spirit, it will develop full
dispassion towards anything else that comes down the line through that appearance of the experience
as a whole. But it also more than just simply, I think, seeing that old life is generally...
Oh, no, he's got a very view for any of those things.
Yeah, most of the sutras, oh, Bikku means all sotapanas, at least.
Bikku was only disumed, oh, he's already there sotapana. And the ones they haven't,
you hear about it in the sutras. The son of the fisherman, the other one.
Right, the one with the right view, with the wrong view. Exactly, they know that.
Yeah, so all this you need a right view for.
Otherwise, yeah, you can go and mow on your whole life and think that life is horrible,
but that's not enough for aren't you. When I drive you, and then develop dispassion.
What is a view?
A view, basically. Like, I get things again, I can say view, yes, I view the other view.
What do you think they've used? Ask yourself, what is a view?
Don't let it tell you, or just ask.
Describe it. How do you describe it yourself?
Just any, don't worry about any...
Standard definition, just describe it, whichever way.
Like, there is, however, experience might be, it may, I may understand, I may not.
Whatever my understanding of it is, whether it's wrong or right, the appeal,
but then the confusion comes up. You go beyond things at some point.
How could that be?
No, but what is a view?
The nature of a view doesn't matter good or bad, right or wrong.
View, what is, what is, what is, why would you describe a view?
How would I?
Yeah, how is it in the nature of a view?
How would you define it? Would you call it a direction?
View of something, point of view coming from something,
centered in something, something is being viewed, how do you describe it?
I don't mean in terms like I'm viewing the cup.
Even that, viewing the cup, just view in general, I'm not talking about you understanding
whatever I view right here right now, just read the word view, what does it mean?
Any view, looking at your eyes, you view through the window, what does it mean?
Seeing something, seeing something, and there is already a direction implied
from here you're seeing something there, yeah, and saying goes for the mental view.
He says, the right view is the view that's not rooted in our wholesome, not rooted in assumption.
So then it's still a direction, and then the mind towards phenomena.
Exactly. Well, you can say consciousness, but obviously the consciousness would stand for something,
say of the mind towards a phenomenon, because consciousness is out there with phenomena more than
its with your mind. So the point is, you have the wrong view of just the view that's not even
a way of itself as a view, and then you get the right view, the view that looks at things as they are,
it still looks at them as they are, but in Ireland, done that so much, he doesn't even look at them as
they are, because that's what they are. So you could be on the view, the view is not required.
He's looking at things rightly, it's not required, because what he has is things rightly.
There's no, so that's why the view is like a tool. Yeah, so think about like when I say,
oh, you said to be mindfulness of your experience at home, and then you apply your reflection
correctly based on instruction. All of that implies already the direction of the view,
then you can be refining your efforts to the point where you just have the right view.
So zero effort required, looking to this look, because how you look is the right way to look,
and you don't need any work. No effort, no circular explanations, no set-up, no descriptions,
you just look at it, and you look at it rightly, because that's how you train your mind,
you get it rightly. Ireland can stop doing that as well, because he can't even conceive
from anyone, whether he looks or not, thus he is going to be on the view. Could we call it then
like more in the verb, like right viewing or wrong viewing? Sure, sure, yeah. The reason
what they call it right view, as a noun, is just because you kind of talk about the nature of
viewing, but there is actually no view without viewing. Right, yeah. So literally viewing, seeming.
And that's definitely, that's very, very like zero effort required.
So you have to have a view, may or may not be corresponding to what is.
Well, that means that you don't have view. But even the wrong view is kind of effortless.
Yeah, just, you don't have to make any further effort. Now to make loads of effort to
undo the wrong view, but when you do so, what you have is the right view, and that's what it
is, because then he doesn't have to make any further effort, except just keeping that view inside,
it's not forgetting about it. Is it possible for the two of you to recognize their wrong views?
Well, yes, when they do, they become sort of honest. So not until that point?
Well, maybe two degrees, because it's not like putujan, so the body is just like a putujan,
a sutva who is completely uninstructed, then the mind who is instructed, then already if he keeps
pursuing that instruction, he becomes like a dhamma-sari, your sardhana-sari. So it's not the
other body, but it's kind of already attained to the right view, he already developed a criteria,
and if he carries on, he will reach so it becomes so the body. So you can't even forget about
sort of an ascetic and whatever, those are just the milestones that they would have singled out
in response to like being constantly questioned when people are reborn after their practice,
and he said, well, here are the guidelines you can infer yourself, but before then, he just wasn't,
he just wanted to see the wrong ones, he doesn't see. And the one who sees, is he finished not
quite yet? Well, is he different from sexuality? No, not quite yet, but he has the right view,
he has the right view, and then he goes sort of on, and sometimes he doesn't even talk about
suckling on his own, there's just three milestones, depending on who he's even struggling to,
doesn't it? The point is, you have to keep trying to understand where the wrong view is,
that's how you get the right view, or you have to keep trying to understand what the right view is,
that's how you get the right view. So you can get closer to understanding, which you're trying to
understand. Still not quite understands, you're still kind of tujina, but you're definitely close
to understanding that a tujina will never make the effort to understand it all. That's like a
gradual showing of the sea, as you see, when it says, the practice is very great, but you're not
suddenly dropped. And so you can discern these wrong assumptions with an external reference point
through mindfulness. Yes, if you do it through an internal point of view, then you'll be some
assembled. Right. For a particular one. But you don't need to do that, because you have all the
instructions you need. I was thinking about that a lot of the teachings in places will come out as
a lot of stories, especially about commentary stories. I remember this one that came in my mind,
it's called the one on Chula Pantaka. Maybe? The way it goes is like there's two brothers.
Oh, yes, yes, yes, it got to go to the potter. I know there's something else, man.
Go ahead. I mean, that one's in the Magi Manikai. This is a commentary story. Oh, I don't know, man.
Basically, it was said that there are two brothers, I think Mahapantaka and Chula Pantaka's
one thing. I think that's the name. Chula Pantaka wasn't very mentally strong,
and so they both were deemed, but Chula Pantaka couldn't memorize any suit as I understand them,
and so his brother said, oh, you might as well just disrupt your suit. So then he was kind of
destroyed, but the certain that was his mind, and he came to him in a flash of light, and said,
oh, just take this cloth. Keep doing that. Oh, my goodness. Keep rubbing the cloth.
Yeah, and then it said, oh, he saw eventually how I got 30. Oh, my goodness.
And so that sounds very commentary on it. Yeah, it will start to make roses.
Oh, there's a story of that king who saw the mango tree being ripped apart because people
want to get the mangoes, and he's a king. He got the light, because he realized it's not worth
the beauty and the sensuality, because you get destroyed. So he's mind abandoned.
Like, it's not. It's not necessarily wrong, maybe he did, but it's wrong to say that,
because then people would think that's what enlightenment is. Not the hard work you put in a
repetition, but it's like a magical little divine blessings of a stupid idiot rubbing the cloth,
and becoming enlightened as a result of it. That's it. That's all you need to do. No.
And he certainly would have not got the point. He might have been rubbing the cloth for whatever
reason. He had to develop psychic powers. Wow. The rest of the story goes there. He
made a thousand copies of himself and no one could figure out which ones are real ones.
Yeah, as if that's how some are relevant. Commentaries like to mention these things.
But say somebody really recognized the wearing down of things, and then apply the same
extrapolate the nature. That's a very refined mind. That's far from stupid.
But the thing you see, the commentary doesn't put the emphasis on that. Say there was a case of
somebody who grabbed the cloth and got that incredibly fine mind to apply that to himself,
and there was enough deduplication to make him an island. They don't dwell on that,
because they themselves were protusionless commentaries. If they had the right view,
they would know where the practice lies in it. No, but they generally thought if you rub the cloth,
you can become an island. And so if you stare at clay pots, you can go earth casina.
And so if you do this, you observe the source of your feet. You will become proficient in whatever
you are doing. I don't know what else I can see up all the months. It's just cloth rubbers.
The whole meditation technique just rubbed the cloth.
No, that's the point. So I said there was a case of something like that. The fact that
commentary put emphasis on the fact that there was a tree being destroyed and that's what
King saw and he became enlightened as a result of seeing. No, if he became enlightened,
like for example, Bakia became enlightened when he would have told him and seen,
there was only seeing. Because his mind was previously developed.
So then this little instruction, which is not for the same footing as rubbing the cloth,
it's the actual instruction. It was enough. But commentary goes so far and people like to believe
that, especially today, whereby no instructions even necessary. You just have to find that
magical little thing to do. And enlightenment will happen just as a thing is now. And that's it.
You are enlightened forever afterwards. Because you guys all had this experience. People would say that.
Yeah, you had this experience. That's what five hundred years are. I am loads of experience.
We all have experiences. My grandma had experiences. Everybody has experience.
There's nothing special about any experience at all.
Well, there is only one special experience that's when you abandon all the experience.
And that's not the experience that you can just have. As the experience you can develop.
That's what it's not given to you. You develop it.
It means you can't be taken away from it. You didn't come by chance.
