So it's generally referring to like the senses, but also then kind of what the senses disclose.
Like I was thinking about like how I disclose, for example like space and distance and stuff
through to the senses and trying to figure that out.
So I'll just read to you what I wrote and you can stop me any time, so I wrote the
senses can be discerned as a point of view or an orientation regarding things.
The working sense base allows for the disclosure of a respected field for a respected world
of visual objects of sounds etc. It must absolutely be this point of view for there to be experience
to have no point of view or every point of view is inconceivable and completely abstract.
Furthermore the position of this point of view corresponds with the location of that respective
matter as disclosed through other senses. The one must be sure to remember that this is
not the matter itself. I can touch my eyeball, but that is a perception of touch, not the
eye which is that by which there is vision.
Hence the senses are negative phenomena, they do not appear, but the fact that there
is a presentation within limits allows for their discernment, the senses then also
disclose space such as in the form of distance, area and so on. Thus I can designate a near
or far or a hear or yonder and so on. This here by appropriating the senses, it comes
me in terms of a spatial positioning. I am here, things are there. I am internal, everything
else is external. With the cessation of that appropriation, things still stand in the
world, but now simply seen as a conscious space body and name and form externally.
I was going to say, when you started, I was about to say, you have to point out that
senses do not appear, but then you pointed it out.
I just was on a tangent at one point where it is kind of like, how do I know that the
sense there is, they do not appear, and that is because there are things, that is how
you can infer.
Yes, you can know. I was just kind of working on that word as point of view, instead of
using the designation senses.
It is a point of view because it is already, anything that is directed, which I think
is conscious, it is already directed. There is consciousness, there is a direction, which
is there is a point of view, and senses in themselves, they have their own direction of
senses towards sense objects.
Absolutely, that is what point of view is.
One other thing I was also thinking about is, in terms of mind, I was trying to sort out
my ideas on what mind as mono, first mind as chitta.
I understand in some basic sense that mono is like, let's say, that by which I can imagine
things, imaginary objects, realistic objects.
So in that kind of sense, though, is there some overlap between that and, let's say,
a thought of a feeling, let's say.
Is that something that appears in the senses that I want to describe that, or is it different?
Would you mean thought of a feeling?
Like, I think such a feeling is present as a thought.
And as one could describe it, it has like a mind object with the mind sense base.
Yeah, sure.
So then the chitta refers to something different.
Yes.
And what's that?
Well, chitta refers to the actual feeling with big felt, and perception that is being
perceived, the peripheral of that, people of chitta is.
So simultaneous presence of Sangha and Vedina.
That's what chitta is in regard to that.
That's the first role that he said.
Well, yeah.
You can say another.
That's the previous presence with the presence of Sangha and Chalva and Vedina.
The simultaneous, to the same extent.
So to the extent of feeling being felt, perception being perceived, the mind is there.
So in terms of the mind as a sense.
So it's not actually inaccurate to translate it as heart, as I really mentioned once,
because it involves feelings, obviously.
That chitta is inconceivable without feelings being felt, perceptions perceived.
So it's the mind on that level.
By the way, you want to say heart, because it brings notion of self-indulgence.
Oh, kind of.
Yeah.
So it's certainly, it's certainly, well, you can say it's, well,
it's a completely different phenomenon.
But it's also, as such, it is quite a, quite a more of a, of a, of a negative.
More general than man with itself would be.
The actual thinking in terms of the mind objects.
So when it comes to chitta, it's, it's more passive in that regard.
In comparison to the mind.
So you can't.
That's why, that's why the moods, the states of mind,
a late in mind, depressed mind, mind with joy, a cornerless mind,
kind of very, very general states.
You discern as something that has a reason.
And you just find it as, as such.
Which means those, those moves are of, of a very general nature.
And, and basically.
Yeah.
You can't be actively, so to speak, involved on that level.
In as much as you could with, with actually choosing what you want to think.
Yeah.
In terms of the mind objects.
And that's probably important to distinguish, because people are mind, mind.
And then when the moods are present or some, quite, quite general kind of feelings
and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and, and big used perceptions.
They know, we got back in the same sense as, as people regarded.
So which is why, actually.
Often people dismiss it as well.
We have said, let's just accept thought.
Cause they can't, they can't conceive it in any other way.
So that they played all in front of them.
Yes.
But so Chita is more of something that's being felt, and obviously some of them use the
perceived at that general level, in some biguse notion, like a notion of expansion, a notion
of trunk, a notion of light, a notion of heavy, those are the perceptions in regard to Chita.
And then you can say that we use a term accessible, inaccessible, in terms of root, but especially.
Could we say something similar with Chita, like that, whenever there's a mood of the mind,
they say, you can say basically the same in regard to the whole five aggregates.
They're really inaccessible to it, in their nature.
Now know either, you access it. You develop up around it in regard to it, and you assume that.
So I think I'm in a bad mood, but that thought is not the mood itself.
Exactly, exactly.
But because you don't know what the mood itself is, that's thought, which is actually not,
the mood itself, is the only thing that stands for that mood for you in that experience.
You assume that, and it is.
Because I was thinking too about, like, in terms of sense basis.
There's a, this seems to me in some sense, out of what this, some, like, sort of say, different view required,
like, for the mind as opposed to, like, the eye.
Because, like, it was back to the distance, for example.
We can't, doesn't make really distance in my mind, except in reference to the other sense basis.
But, like, in terms of just a thought, there's no distance, so to say.
Well, yeah, I mean, there is no, so much of a defined distance, but the distance is very much there.
The space is very much there.
It's actually primarily spaces metal.
That's what the space is.
What the intentions are with the movement is, the notion of movement, even if nothing moves.
The possibility of movement.
So they'll ask at least in a space.
No, that's how space is being generated, so to speak.
So, that's how, because of that, you can see it in things, around it.
So, it is, that's why space can be used.
So, it's often described as one of, like, after the four great elements, then the element of space, the element of consciousness.
Or, it's not a fundamental one.
It almost is.
I mean, it's only in person, or, obviously.
And they have that base of infinite space.
So, I found that, or curious.
Well, it is, it is.
And, obviously, it's, you know, there is plenty of things to be contemplated on.
In regard to that.
In terms of, to develop your mind.
Because, if you do develop a notion of space, I'm even being spaced out.
Spaced for that.
I mean, like, generally, understanding that the phenomenon of space, as a negative in regard to the phenomena that appear.
But it's, it's real as such.
It is real as a negative phenomenon.
What do you mean by it as a negative?
Well, the space without the object is in concealment, without the object, sir, that is, it is in concealment.
So, there is no such thing as a pure space.
Even the infinite space.
It's the infinite negative.
So, you step into it, negative, though.
You don't take it up as an object, which is important.
You can't look at it that way.
Exactly.
So, it is more simple level than, let's say, space disclosed through my eye.
You're saying, basically, that all that appears is, of course, vision and objects of vision.
And within that field, it's almost like you're saying, basically, space is only disclosed by objects.
Well, space is disclosed by mind in regard to objects.
So, the eye and the objects, there wouldn't be any space, discerned.
But then, obviously, there wouldn't be any scene, discerned if there is no mind present.
So, it's that presence of the mind.
That's what space is.
Yeah, I'm having trouble seeing that.
I can understand that, no mind or vision.
No, you don't have to see it elsewhere.
Basically, what you think now, that the space is, that's being discerned through your eye and the vision,
stay with that same space, just putting the place of mind.
Don't attribute it to the eye.
But it's the same thing that you've seen.
You're just assuming it at the wrong place.
So, the eye can only see, but the mind is not disclosed here, the under and the between.
Well, yes, but see, even the eye can only see, would make any sense.
You couldn't even think that if you can't think it.
But if it's not being thought.
So, the senses, regardless of the mind, are inconceivable.
They don't operate.
So, that's, you know, you won't find the space, it's clearly defined phenomena in your mind.
But what I'm explaining now might be enough, basically, to just sort of bring it back,
just a couple of millimeters back, so to speak, which is enough to stop assuming
and rooting that space into the actual eye and forms,
means basically misconceiving it.
So, in that sense, that's why the mind comes first.
Although the whole notion of space, for example, is negative in regard to things that appear.
Structurally, it precedes things that appear.
Space, their mind.
Either way, let's, we're talking about space.
So, let's say space.
So, if you then discern that, that, okay, so space can't stand on its own.
You know that. So, you're not misconceiving it as a separate mystical universal entity
of some of some great providence of the divine nature or whatever else.
So, you know what it is.
You discern it as an eighth phenomena.
But, you know that it comes structurally.
So, simultaneously present with the things that have been seen,
her touch, taste, smell, taste and thought of.
So, the space is simultaneously present with those things.
But, it structurally precedes them.
It's more fundamental.
Which is how people under-pursuming that space and time are universal entities.
That we inhabit in.
We are in them.
But, obviously, there is overshooting the mark.
That's when you give it complete independence.
But, it's not independent.
It would not be discernible.
The space, if there are no things that occupy space.
But, there is a truth in it in a sense that it is more primordial structurally.
So, not before, not after.
Simultaneous to present.
And, in that sense, it precedes.
It comes first.
And then everything else comes second.
So, if your mind is discerned directly,
and establishes itself upon the phenomenon of space,
then you can see basically how it will be withdrawn.
The mind from everything else that occupies that space.
With your established mind on that.
Exactly.
And such general negative phenomenon of space is infinite.
It's not kept to it.
You can put it on the system today.
And the mind gets established upon that.
And if it is established upon that,
it can't possibly be exercised for it to attain any last version of the illusion
in regard to anything that occupies that space.
Now, is that seen as circumstantially risen?
That infinity of space.
That's, I'm going to go on a limb and say,
that's not referring to, like, oh, the universe is infinitely...
Oh, absolutely not.
No, no, no.
That's the projected concealed space in time.
The protrusion of space in time.
They look scientific.
Exactly.
Scientific space in time.
No, no, no, no.
The infinity of space is the infinity of the mind.
The infinity of the attention is the infinity of the structure
of the five aggregates.
So what are we saying when we're saying space?
Then what are we saying?
Like, what is space referring to, I guess, one of the space?
Space.
Yeah.
Like...
There is space between you and me, space.
Yeah, you can, you can, you can, particularly, you can say that there is also space.
And she is the same nature as the general, you know,
base of infinity, infinite space.
I have to think about that some more.
Yeah.
You have to, basically, the mind is trained in regard to it,
because you don't want to make it into an object.
Like, you, me, two positives.
And a different angle of the spectrum from this point of view.
And then, oh, where is the space now?
And then you try to grasp the space in the same positive terms.
Try to disclose it in the same manner.
You want that...
Well, you'll disclose something, but that won't be the space.
So if you think that is that what space is,
then you'll be serious when it's consuming it.
Or not finding it.
So it has to be seen the same level as mind, so to say.
Yes.
Has to be seen as a peripheral phenomena that structurally comes first.
Not temporarily.
What is meant when something structurally comes first?
It means it's simultaneously present.
But it's not second.
It's first.
And you're saying you can have ideas of non-temporal with at first and second.
Yeah.
First and second.
Well, you can have this and this.
But one of the best is the first best.
The other one is the second best.
As if one is more fundamental than the other one.
Well, it's fundamental.
Fundamental means basically it precedes the other one in that order.
So imagine you have a line of people in front of you.
Or just two people in front of you.
They're in the same line.
They don't let the right not before or after.
They're right there at the same time.
But one of them is closer.
The other one isn't.
Close.
Yeah.
Can you explain that?
It's a vertical point.
Not the linear.
Like you said in the preface.
Yes.
Okay.
I think you're the virus in there.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's better in there.
Yeah.
So simultaneous presence of the two things.
Why is it close to the other one?
But they're both simultaneously present.
Is that similar to like thinking of things as more external, less external?
Or is that a different kind of route?
Well, it's a different route.
It will be a different route.
Yeah.
How do we do the right with the same simultaneous principle?
But it's over there.
But yeah, I wouldn't try to.
But yeah, I wouldn't try to.
I realized after I said it, I know.
Yeah.
It's a different route.
And the first thing is the mind.
It's always the first, most first, first.
Yes.
Yeah.
Is it something like a place which has no good cavity?
It's the things.
Place.
If it wasn't, there wasn't a place for it.
So it could be placed.
It's a place, but you can't.
Space.
Yeah.
Space is that it's a kind of place which it places.
It's like a place.
Yeah.
You can say that.
I know what you're doing, but the thing is, when you say place,
you put imagine an actual setup.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's like a non-located unit.
Well, that's the thing, because the structure,
the space is infinite, so to speak.
That means that's why things are possible to arise on a particular level
on the basis of that space.
So the mind, mind, is off space and off time,
not in space and in time.
It's made of it.
That's where the mind is.
So that's why you want to think about that because in that,
when you think about mind,
well, you won't make it mind.
You'll see it as part of the space.
And when you think about the space, scientific space,
you won't make it into scientific space because you know
well, it wouldn't be there because that's where the mind is.
But if you divorce it, then yes, you get the scientific space
that we want to have it and you get this mind,
inside of this brain, then nobody,
the only mean knows and sees.
But space is off mind and off time,
not in space and in time.
It brings to mind, like if you,
you know, you get a lot of people trying to organize
their thoughts in it.
It almost feels like they're organizing things in space,
like mental space.
A very mundane example, but it's trying to start with.
Well, yeah.
If the mind is off space,
you can possibly be entering this external public
assumed space over the science.
It's going to work without me.
I would also contribute to me starting to think in this way
was I was observing a particular thought, let's say.
And it's so easy to assume,
oh, my thoughts are happening here somewhere.
And that's where I got thing, oh,
just not why assume that.
And that's how the mind can expand itself
in terms of the development,
in terms of getting established upon different bases.
When you stop assuming it right here,
in this head or whatever,
whatever kind of assuming,
because that's completely materialist.
So then you're actually, you know,
my thought cannot really be placed in this head.
So that's already quite a transcendental dimension,
that you will never aware of,
yet it's a simple thought.
Any thought?
Oh, so the thought arises,
it is real as phenomena,
it endures,
it persists while it's changing,
yet you can put it in that space
that you regard as space,
usually in a common sense reading.
Exactly.
Same with the nature of perception.
Same with any of the aggregates.
Because aggregates are not in space,
they're of space.
For other, the space is basically generated
by the positioning of the five aggregates
of the simultaneously present matter,
feeling, perception, intentions, and consciousness.
You've got a pinpoint, I'll say.
No, no, no, no, of course not.
It's because there it is, isn't it?
Yes, yes.
Because it perceives that destination
of its there is here.
Because the five aggregates
are present, it's not one,
point of view.
It's five, point of view.
It's five, point of view.
It's five, the main five heaps.
That's where they're called heaps.
Can't they just pact?
I mean, they're pact over each other.
So to speak, but not like they don't mix,
they don't merge, they don't start,
they don't connect, they move into one mass.
They remain fully distinct
and cannot possibly encroach into another domain.
And that's already off space.
But I think, actually,
is our other space confusing.
I kind of said in the space.
But it's not in the space.
It's giving the space the priority
over the five aggregates.
But it doesn't matter.
That's why you can go past in three different spaces.
It's not the ultimate development of the mind.
It's perception and feeling.
Conversation of it, that's the ultimate development of the mind.
Which means space is secondary from that point of view.
Simultaneous present.
Just enough squares.
That's what means off space.
So the space that you're thinking of,
that you're seeing in the established mindfulness
of experiences are all.
It's not, you know, there is a space.
You don't have to find the right, the correct space.
All you have to do is stop assuming it as being ultimately the first,
in a sense that everything is inside of it.
So just maintain the Simultaneous presence of that phenomena,
but see it secondary.
Like something's proceeding.
Yeah, something's determining it.
Which in the final gets.
Which is experiencing it as a whole.
Or resting on it together.
The object's resting on it.
I don't mean that.
It's supported.
It is caused by the equities.
Well, yes, yes.
Yes, yes.
If that will establish this Simultaneous mindfulness
of the two Simultaneous things.
Then yeah, you can do that.
But it's not.
And the space is not the same protein as the phylogic aids.
It's in regard to them, but not them.
It's very much like up and on it.
Yeah, we'll see if they feed or not.
Well, the space.
Yeah.
Well, no, there's a thing.
Because how can you, well, think of it as this.
How can you have a notion of space if you're not thinking it?
If it's not present as a no matter how ambiguous thought is still a thought.
Which means the mind does come first.
It is of space.
It's not in space.
So you can't have the mind without the space.
But mind is not in the space.
Because even the ambiguous general mystical notion of just pure space,
it's a notion.
It's a thought.
It's a reason they're not present.
And that would not be the case.
If that genuine space would precede your thought and your thought would be in the space.
Well, that is actually inconceivable.
You can't even think of why even that misconception, it's kind of contradictory.
Because you can't even misconceive it even if you want to.
That's why once you discern things, you can't undo the knowledge.
Because it just becomes incomprehensible.
So in this particular sense, that you have now a notion of things that are in space.
But then that whole notion rests upon ignoring the fact that that space is also thought.
So these thoughts are in the thought.
Well, that's not then the space that I'm attributing it to.
Which means thoughts are thoughts.
So then thoughts of space are thoughts of space.
Can't be thoughts in space.
Because there will be another thought.
So it's inaccessible.
Basically, saying that it's inaccessible means ceasing the assumption of it.
Because when you know when it becomes inaccessible, means you cannot access it through ignorance.
It's basically cannot be assumed.
Means it's known.
You cannot assume something when you know it.
And that's an involuntary, that's not an optional thing.
There can be worldly assumption that you might have.
Oh, I assume such places, such and such.
And then you find out you've got there and you see for yourself what it is.
And even if your assumption was right, that assumption is gone now.
Because now you actually experienced it and seen it for yourself, understood it.
So even if you think about your past assumption, you can't possibly revoke it.
Because now the knowledge is tightly fitted in the space where there's no place for assumption to end it.
Hence it becomes inaccessible to assumption.
It's a bit of vision of space.
I see space.
Of space.
Now that space, whatever I perceive it as as a thought, that's not the space.
Well, no, there's no space you have.
So it's either going to be, there's no real space as opposed to space you have.
There's only concealed space or space free from consumers.
So an assumed space or space known for what it is and not assumed.
But now you're trying to have both there at the same time and compare them and see which one is right.
So the vision of space, it's not technically of space, it's of things that negatively reveal what other show the space as there, as not things.
So you kind of say that the difference is like instead of saying this is in space, rather one should say there are things that disclose the presence of space.
Yes, and that disclosed space is more fundamental in regard to those particular things that disclose it.
But on the point of view of the mind and the final aggregates, it isn't the ultimate fundamental.
So as I said, if you use space in a way to practice contemplation in regard to particular things, that's fine because basically that space will stand for the mind.
But you want to be careful not to develop views that you are somehow in this universal public space and give it, like, and make it an entity that it's independent of yourself.
So if you want to do that, well then don't forget that the mind is a fundamental thing.
So in other words, what I'm saying, you can take particular things and then practice contemplation in regard to development of the mind, discerning of the nature of the thoughts and the mind and the citta, because that already includes that space.
Basically, all you want to do is develop, or rather descend the principle between the actual and the peripheral.
So if that actual is the extensive object, peripheral will be space in regard to it.
And that's fine, if you develop knowledge of the principle.
But if you start looking at the peripheral space as the actual, well then mind will be peripheral in regard to it.
The final aggregates will be peripheral in regard to it.
So then you develop again, understanding of the same principle.
But you don't want to be discerning peripheral space in regard to things and then just assuming the same space that shares the same in regard to the mind as well.
Then you're not the relevant principle of the simultaneous present.
You're not discerning it in regard to either.
So space is always peripheral, it's always negative, unless we're thinking.
Then it isn't.
Then you can say something else is, which means what you're thinking of is then not is misconceived space.
Because you think of space where the space cannot be found.
That's why from the point of view of discerning the peripheral, it doesn't matter if you refer to the space or the mind to the peripheral.
It doesn't matter how you refer to it, as long as it's seen as peripheral.
So then when you have a thought of space, then when you may mind fully in regard to peripheral, it may matter a lot of the peripheral in regard to that thought of this space.
And then soon enough you'll see that that's not the space.
The space is always on the peripheral level.
The space, your experiences of space, can be in the space.
In the space would mean basically when you would feel it to give a complete independent, what complete independence to the notion of actual thought of space.
And then attribute even the peripheral to it, say it's in the space.
And that's a view, that's a wrong view, that's a wrong assumption.
Like this thing, if I say something in space, it's assuming space was already kind of just there hanging out with it.
So you can have a thought of the space in the space, but don't give it that full independence and don't attribute that which is peripheral in regard to that thought of this space.
Don't attribute the peripheral to it.
As in everything is in the space, because that's completing your choice with actual no basis for that assumption.
And if you want to discern space in the right terms, you don't have to try to think it out because it's pointless.
Just feel the feeling, perceive where there was being perceived simultaneously.
Then experience will be the experience of space.
And then experience even precedes the craving that you have now to fit the space in the right terms.
And if you see the craving, then well it's fit in the right terms.
Not pollutants.
Hence the emotions of it you might have had then, before that of all space was this space is that it just becomes pointless.
I think one has to work very hard to get out of the typical notions of space.
Yeah, well that's the thing, that's what I'm pointing at.
You don't have to get out by thinking your way out.
You just have to get out by seeing it for what it is.
So accepted, did you have notions of space? And then that's a present, there is an experience as a whole for what it is.
And then in regard to that, feel the feelings, perceive those perceptions.
Basically uprooted with mindfulness. Don't try to figure it out and explain it to yourself.
So it needs to be understood and seen and discerned, but it doesn't mean explain it to yourself.
So that's kind of why I wanted to understand something but not necessarily to put it into words.
Well no, no, that means you did not quite understand it.
Okay. That's why you qualify it just as I said it.
Explaining it to yourself, sorry, explaining it to yourself is not, it's not the same as understanding it.
Like explaining it is finding a plausible explanation from the point of view that you still have.
That's why I explained it, it's plausible to me now.
But the criteria of what's plausible are not, it's not fully developed obviously,
because otherwise you wouldn't be resorting to the temporal explanations of things.
What you're referring to is describing something once it has been understood.
And that's definitely not an explanation, it's a description.
Because why? Because throughout that description, the thing remains present because it's understood.
In explanation, that's not the case. In explanation, you might arrive at it.
Well, so you think you arrive at it when you explain it.
But that means you didn't have it to begin with. That's how can you explain it if you don't have it to begin with.
So really, you want to replace explanation with descriptions.
Thermological descriptions. That's what suitors are. Just pure descriptions.
Another, let's say, that's a real space.
Peripheral.
See, even ocean of peripheral, it's already an ocean of...
It's fans.
Well, in a way, yeah. The expanse.
Oh, this is actually, and then everything else that's not that,
it's already the expanse in regard to it.
That's where the mind is. That's where the space is.
Like foreground.
So background.
The experience.
Sure.
Yeah.
So that's why you don't...
That's why when you have, even if you have a thought of doubt, what is space then?
Find peripheral in regard to vent. And that's where the space is.
And that's how it becomes impenetrageable to doubt as well.
Because doubt can only be actual.
Going back a bit.
The whole thing we've just been talking about is,
is there is a reason why we can also do...
There's many things like internal external that's also spatial.
Yes, yeah.
Basically, the external would kind of naturally be attributed to anything that's sort of in space.
In space, actual through the senses.
Everything else, this whole, the expanse, I was referring to,
would be kind of these in videos internal.
But when there's also seen a simple tendency present phenomenon,
not as the sense objects, obviously,
but is that which is, which pertains to the mind,
then, yeah, either way, whether it's internal or external,
are seen basically as external in regard to you, to your point of view.
Because, you know, for someone for the untrained mind,
things around me that I can see touch, taste, mouth, and so on.
Those are the ones that I can access that I can have.
And that's everything is external.
Everything that's not that is internal and I'm kind of in between and everywhere.
And usually, people like that for them, their own thoughts are not even seen.
There's something that exists.
They clearly talk about what they think.
They will not give it the same amount of existence as they would to the things
that they can obtain through the senses.
Why the mind? Because the mind would so far out,
proliferate the towards the senses that became the threshold of what's real,
what the being is, what the extent of the being is.
And then everything under that threshold is just assumed to not exist.
Although that's a contradiction in terms of existence.
Because you can say this doesn't exist.
Well, it clearly exists, but otherwise you can refer to it.
How can you attribute non-existence to something that doesn't appear at all?
You can't, but the fact that it's attributed non-existence to something means it has appeared,
which means it actually exists.
That's the same mind from the senses.
That's right.
Yes, that's what it means, like you can't.
Every reflection, every contemplation,
I didn't mention it in the last of the review,
has to be rooted in the experience as a whole,
mindfulness of the experience as a whole.
It has to be rooted there, that has to be the starting point.
And now think about space on the basis of that.
Note on the basis of your preconceived notion of the space that you had from before.
You actually have to...
You might feel the craving to know about it,
but I have to understand it on these terms, you can't.
It's the same order to those terms.
And there are several terms on the basis of the mindfulness of the experience as a whole,
and then there think about space without losing that basis of that mindfulness.
So basically that you descend space within that.
You're going to assume it.
You don't fabricate it.
You find it for what it is.
That's you.
That's the point.
It makes everything else.
It reveals everything else.
That's deep.
The lens.
The objective here.
If you don't have that, do you have that view?
Anything else?
Be an explanation.
Yeah, pretty much.
And also, as I said,
I'm pretty sure I mentioned that in the last episode as well, you have to know
what you're supposed to do without view.
You have to know that that view is not the end.
It's just the beginning.
That view, basically, is the view,
upon which you can develop discernment.
That view is not the discernment.
The lens here.
Yeah, it's here.
It's too.
It's too, exactly, for seeing things through that lens.
But for most people, mindfulness and experience of all is the ultimate kind of
combination of the spiritual practice, whereby you just stay mindful in this pure
pristine awareness and what not.
You just stay mindful with your ignorance.
Because you're clearly not trying to revel in it.
Oh, no, too much thinking.
Yeah, too much thinking if you're thinking on a non-mindful base.
Then, yeah, you're just revolving around the same, same ignorance, same assumptions
and basically psychotherapeuticizing your way out of it,
explaining it to yourself, managing whatever else.
That's not the Dharma.
That's not the practice.
But if you establish the mindful base of the mindfulness of experiences of all
then you can be all the thinking you want.
Because then it's the right mindful thinking.
It's the thinking, basically, it's the Dharma.
Another thought for mental objects is Dhammas.
But people are all dismissed by thinking.
Is this thinking?
Well, we look to them.
All dating God did mindfulness of experiences of all
as this kind of overwhelming spiritual experience.
It's just mindfulness.
It might provide you with some novelty perceptions and all of the feelings
because you never mindful on that level.
But it's just mindfulness of experiences of all.
It's mindfulness of experience.
And then you know when you're supposed to look for within that.
And you know that, but even so.
By the service of this, by the investigation of the meeting.
You won't tell you the answers by itself, which is what people think.
Just teach me what I need to know.
I've heard it so many times.
It's like, yeah, right.
You know that it will teach you what you need to know.
It will teach you more evidence.
Otherwise, you will naturally be free from some sort.
Yeah, that's what you have to take up with it.
You're ready for some sort of perception.
You need the right instruction here.
The basis for contemplation.
Think about the senses.
Yeah, with that.
And full understanding of the fire against.
Full understanding of the same basis.
Full understanding of what it's about.
Full understanding of now that we are in our Europa.
Full understanding of anything from the sutras.
Think of that.
Full understanding of wholesome is wholesome, unwholesome is unwholesome.
Doesn't matter what it is from the sutras.
The whole thing is fully understood from the basis of mindfulness.
So this means it's a home.
That's your meditation.
That's your repulsion and that's your sum.
Yeah, this how it says there.
It's there.
It's the same thing.
It's holding with mindfulness while basically the right order of things
being established through our thinking.
I don't know if this topic is going to turn out to be exactly related,
but it's using some of the same terminology we've been kind of thinking about.
You've mentioned a lot of times the consciousness being external
with the objects as both to thinking, oh my consciousness is here.
I just kind of trying to think about that.
It's not to say that you do need the sense base for there to be.
Yeah, I see the problem.
I mean, I said that in a very well-defined context.
And that context was basically...
It's not a level of objects that you see.
It's on the level with the matter is because of which there are objects that you can see.
And you're not seeing the matter.
But when people don't know, when people still have assumption and conceive
is that they're seeing that which matter is.
I'm looking at the cup and that's where the matter of the cup is.
Like I'm seeing the matter.
I'm not seeing my perception.
Then they would think I'm just saying consciousness is out there with that cup.
Which again,
could actually aid somebody in right thinking,
even if they say it wrongly.
If they investigate further, they'll find out, okay, surely it's not with the cup.
But it's with the matter of the cup.
Which obviously I have perception in regard to because of, but I can't perceive it.
Which means you can't even exist consciousness like that.
But it belongs.
It's oriented from the point of view of the matter,
not from your point of view of the inside of whatever you assume.
When you say that, that kind of gave me a start.
Matter, it could be like this matter, that matter.
I'm not obviously just needing what is actually matter,
but like the base or the other, if they're both matter,
consciousness is saying it's on that level.
Yes, external.
Yes, because that matter is external.
Consisting is bound with it.
Okay, that clarifies.
Because yeah, I was thinking, like,
they're really with the cup.
Yeah, yeah, exactly, yeah.
No, you would just be basically like,
well, I'm sure they were using philosophy,
they were just saying consciousness in our day.
And I mean, my even, even in existentialism,
such, they were saying,
but obviously it was quite clear.
But the way he would put it,
was intentionality is out there with the things.
And in a way, that's true.
Because then that out there,
oh, that means basically this inside is internal of me.
It comes out there.
It comes because of the things.
You can have these thoughts about,
oh, I'm going to do this and this and this with that.
And that thing over there,
only because those things are already given.
But it doesn't need to be qualified,
because it's too easily assumed.
It's too complex to be just put in one sentence,
without it being misunderstood by somebody
who's coming from the point of view of wrong views.
Compossibly, just get that right.
No, I think that clearly
seems quite clear.
So next time.
Yeah, sure.
Doesn't even say,
it's the same time also,
it's not obviously the matter,
it's conscious, so to say,
it's consciousness, it's conscious.
Is that so?
But they need each other.
No, really.
That's the ultimate thing.
No.
That's when you really use the word juxtaposed,
when you came to consciousness and the matter.
They're not even connected.
They're just placed side by side for no reason.
And that's a whole life.
No reason to.
No reason, no preparation.
No preparation or suffering.
But like, you need the eye in a certain state
for there to be visual conscious, no?
Like, yes.
Like, stab my eyes.
There's not going to be that conscious anymore.
Yeah, sure.
Well, look, they won't be under the matter.
And then the consciousness won't be their idea.
You can't have a pair side by side
if one of the pair is missing.
So you're saying they're a pair,
but...
Jack's supposed.
They're not in the same footing.
They're just there.
And again, you can don't think they're in space.
They're not sitting there next to you on the fire branch,
talking to each other.
There's completely Jack's supposed.
Everywhere and nowhere.
So to speak, because you can't put it in space.
One of the actors is Jack's supposed.
Is Jack's supposed to superimpose?
Well, see, like superimposed,
kind of implies a direction.
Superimposed.
Superimposed doesn't.
Is this place side by side?
And the result of that placement
is the whole rising manifestation
of the fire ivy ex
of the ore of Namhoopa.
That placement is removed.
And you can't even conceive that Jack's supposed relationship.
You can discern it right away,
but you can't actually access it,
because it's way below your feet and always moving.
So then you recognize
that the entire experience that you have,
as you just said,
all you need to do is have your eyes removed.
And it's gone.
The whole domain of vision,
everything you ever seen,
everything you ever would have seen,
everything you ever experienced,
any feelings you experience,
an account of things you've seen,
thoughts, plans,
happiness, sadness,
for eons and eons of lifetimes,
and that's it.
Your eyes have been removed.
The whole vision's gone.
But just the thing is,
then you're reborn again.
Right, yeah.
It was using us like just trying to get the terms.
Yeah.
And you can't even,
you can't take possession
of that relationship,
which means you're just borrowing.
You're just basically a user
of that which doesn't belong to you,
yet you use it as if it is you want.
Eyes, nose, ears, tongue, body, thoughts.
But because of which those things are,
you can't possibly access or have or influence.
Is this just completely inaccessible for my redirection?
You're taking the answer.
Thank you.
Just writing your eyes and stories,
and then don't mind the prince of it.
Oh yeah, sure, sure, sure.
I'm just referring to the actual,
the whole, the circumstantial nature of it,
inaccessible, which means all you know is,
it's not going to be.
It is, but it's not going to be.
No, not being for me.
That's for sure.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So you don't want to overshure the mark,
but you certainly must not undershoot it either.
And by that I mean,
you don't want to start conceiving the access
to that because of which your vision is there,
to that because of which
you smell, taste, sounds, touch, thoughts are there.
By not conceiving the access,
you stop maintaining the wrong assumptions.
You don't fade out.
And then, in the scene, there is just a scene,
in the house, there is just a head, and so on.
So just to clarify my own head
isn't going to be repeating probably things.
That's fine.
Matter and consciousness paired,
but entirely different.
Not connected.
Not connected.
But it's there, like they're paired together,
but not connected in any way.
It just happens to be in that.
Yeah.
And result of that complete circumstantial checks the posing
is your whole existence.
And it always was, no matter of the realm,
no matter of the river.
That was always the case,
for devils, for animals.
Nobody's exempt from it.
Yet, it's complete circumstantial.
I feel like you could drill something in that,
but still have plenty of assumptions about other things.
Yeah, you just need to drill it longer,
until it saturates everything else.
That's fine.
I feel like you could drill something in that,
you could drill something in that.
You could drill something in that.
You could drill something in that.
It's a matter of consciousness.
It's a matter of consciousness.
It's about the domain of Peter, either.
He's very good.
He said that once, like he can't say,
when his letters in other years,
he said, like, he can't say consciousness of consciousness.
Like people use word consciousness.
Every day, people will not come by consciousness.
How many of them include yourself?
What do you refer to when you say consciousness?
Final.
Clarified.
Has the Buddha said in the Suhrer so many times,
don't believe many, many are unturned?
Investigate the meaning, interrogate yourself,
until things are clear.
And again, not for the purpose of intellectual satisfaction,
but for the purpose of full freedom from suffering.
Because if this interrogate, self interrogation,
and you're asking the meaning is done,
on the basis of the mindfulness of the experience at all,
then the knowledge will result from freedom from suffering.
It cannot be any other way.
Clarified.
We say that we can discern consciousness
because things appear, like we can't see it.
You can know that it's there.
Yes.
But it is very important that,
no matter what contemplation doing,
writing it down, thinking and pondering,
to do it on the basis of the mindfulness of the experience at all.
And that can be established on almost anything,
general, and you discern things with it,
with it, with it.
Sure, but it can.
Ask your knowledge.
Yes.
Hold on, I'm just here, present in this room on double downhill
in the central province,
on the island, surrounded by the ocean,
on the planet Earth.
That's all true.
In the universe.
In the universe.
In the expanse.
And the personal general does,
it does appear,
not like consciousness, that true.
Yes, it appears.
But obviously peripheral appears
to less detect the intensity of the actual.
But it's different than the relation
between consciousness and others.
Yes.
The consciousness is the dead direction from which
where peripheral is then found.
So the ultimate peripheral is the peripheral of the dead
of the earth, which is peripheral of consciousness.
The ultimate negative.
Exactly.
When we establish the awareness
of something perishable,
then it's my way.
It's not the same thing,
it's just completely forgetting about it.
But it still has to be there to some degree,
but then there's...
Well, that's how mindfulness is properly established,
but it's really.
The actual mindfulness is not mindfulness.
It's going...
So the mindfulness is...
That's where mindfulness is established
on the peripheral level.
Hence, people are not aware of peripheral,
and not mindful.
But it's still kept in mind,
even though it's peripheral.
Yes, that's what it means.
Like, you don't...
You don't need to keep the peripheral in mind.
Peripheral is already there.
Hence, by discerning it,
you become mindful.
It's actually, by knowing the peripheral,
you become mindful.
You can't unknow it.
You're not doing it.
You might be doing it in the beginning
because you don't know how to do it,
and then you try to do it,
which is what you're doing.
But by discerning the peripheral,
you are mindful of it.
That's mindfulness.
That's what it is.
So simply by knowing the peripheral
level,
if I'm sitting in the coody,
you could think of that as,
look at that peripherally.
When you're saying, actually,
it's not like actual versus imaginary.
It's present peripherally.
Like, I'm in the coody.
No, not in a sense of imaginary.
Oh, okay.
Like, you're thinking,
I'm sitting in the chair now.
I'm sitting in this chair.
That's actually the front.
Yeah, it's basically what you're attending right there right now
in front of you.
By then, the presence of the chair,
the presence of your body, the body posture,
the room,
the anterior,
the normal type of vehicle,
the health, the element of the earth,
all those peripheral,
that your mind can discern
and become established upon.
So, that doesn't mean
you become completely oblivious to the actual.
No, that means
you make that
new peripheral,
sorry, you make that peripheral a new actual.
No, it means you're mindful
of that peripheral in regard to
whatever happened to be actual.
So, again, is that relationship?
Two simultaneous,
present things, peripheral and actual.
I don't think you could actually even forget the actual.
You could actually even forget the actual
entirely if that's been actual.
Exactly.
Exactly, that's the whole point.
When you recognize that you
can't forget it,
that's like the other meeting mindfulness
and even the act of forgetting
your mind full of.
And then the act of remembering
your mind full of.
There's no any more
any induction of ignorance in regard to those things.
It's impossible.
It's going to be the one percent
of either actual or at least one percent
of either peripheral,
kind of 100 percent of all.
So, that one percent is
more than enough
to establish your mindfulness.
