To me, there's always this gap between self and others, other things, it can never
be filled, but you can never get to anything, that self can never hurt anything. There's always this
abyss that can never be crossed, if you know what I mean. Yeah, oh no, thisness, yeah, never
able to get anything, no matter how intense you want it. Well, that gap is the result of you assuming
the sense of self, which obviously automatically means assuming the self of others, or rather
assuming self internally, assuming self externally. So for as long as that assumption is given the
priority, as long as it's the center of your acts and thinking, they will be a gap generated as a result of it.
You see, and then that's how things are, so it's a mistake, so to speak, but it's a
beginning-less mistake. So then the gap is real, and the sense of self is real, and the sense of
others is also real. So you just have to reverse it. Instead of me trying to fill this gap, trying to
possess this gap, trying to acquire things and others or whatever else, you realize that the whole
picture is upside down, so it's actually you are the result. You're sent to self-sense about this
if the result or the gap that's impossible to own. So it's not me reaching out to possess the gap,
to fill the gap. It's basically gap defining me as well as that being that's in lack, that's
lacking, that's in the need, and so on. So when you recognize that actually you are secondary,
your sense of self is secondary to the gap, and you start seeing gap as a phenomenon, then you
will start reaching for it less and less, because you recognize actually reaching is the result of
the gap, not that reaching is the beginning when you kind of try to get the gap and fill it.
Because you feel the need to fill because the gap is there. So if you appropriate the gap,
you appropriate the need to fill. For if you appropriate the possibility of that gap being filled
through your assumption, you will then crave to fill the gap. But none of that will possible if
the gap hasn't risen there beforehand on its own, manifest it, a reason to you. So if you recognize
that this need to fill it, it's because it has a reason as such. It's not yours, it's not you
filling it, or trying you trying to fill, or that it needs to be there. The gap arises as a gap.
So then the need to fill doesn't belong to anybody, and then you stop filling it.
This is the need for oneness, or the idea that oneness. That's only the result of the separation.
Unity applies separation, and as much as separation applies the possibility of unity,
but abandoning both means none of it is applicable anymore.
Because people would think that unity, but that's only because they maintain
the idea of separation through craving for unity. You have to abandoning both. You have to see
that whether it's separating or united, or both separate united, neither separate nor united,
it's rather earned, and it's determined by the presence of the gap beforehand,
presence of the senses beforehand. So you can't stop that. You can't stop that when I say
before, and I mean structurally before, not temporarily, before, temporarily before.
So things arise on the wrong, the manifest, including your thoughts, and then always you
appropriate them, you assume that the ownership in hindsight, in retrospect, you say,
well, that was mine, but the fact that things arise on the wrong means you're not their creator,
their eyes to you, you might feel that they are rising for you, and so on, but all of
the very secondary to their arising. So if it seemed like that, then the whole idea of
unity, separation, feeling again, craving for it, impossible to insatiable, you can't satisfy
desires or whatever else, all that is the result of the things that have ordered your reason,
and you appropriate them. So appropriate them means you fall under, will you become a victim?
So speak of their inherent pressure, like the pressure of the senses, senses are like one that
in most they want to go in feed, where they want to go in feed. You take them to videos, I mean,
you are going there to feed, they are dragging you left and right, like crocodile, monkey,
wild boar, all those similarities are for the senses. But they do that on their own, that's their
business. It's just you interfering with, you are trying to own it, which means because they're
stronger than you, they'll take you with them, if you're stronger than them, then you'll be in
control of the senses, but the only way to be stronger than your senses is to let go them,
to recognize what they are. Obviously that is possible to do only once you have restrained them,
that's why sealer comes first. And then the whole idea of of of of of of feeling that gap,
which is becoming inconceivable, because that gap was only the result of maintaining that mistake
upon usher, that then in return would be feeding more of the desire for ownership, because it's
obviously that you can't own, but you took the whole, like you took it, the entire situation is taken
in an upside down manner, and that's and that is taken for granted. So no matter how much you
kind of your experience shows you that you can't fill that gap, that you can't own things,
you never really question that assumption, you just keep doing it, you just keep it each time,
and you can't help it, and you even say here my desire can never be satisfied, but you can't help
going after them, because the five, five senses are pulling me, and it's weak, but if you were to
start using hold on, what if I've taken this completely the wrong way around, what if it's not
supposed to be filled, and what if that whole idea of feeling this gap and this desire is the
result of me trying to fill the gap and the desires. So you constantly trying will make you want to try,
see it's a vicious circle, it just goes around, but the entire thing is entirely gratuitous,
it's just there's nothing, because there could be a desire, if you look at marriage and relationships
like that, the desire to be united with the other person, the love, so this constant craving,
yeah, it's not a problem, the purest of the of the worldly, what anyone will love for that matter
actually, it's just absolutely rooted in attachment, rooted in craving, rooted in that
assumption of ownership, so yeah there is pure love and a pure love is pretty much craving,
because once that's in play, that love that is designed to, for oneness, there is something
constantly, yeah, and for as long as you take that assumption for granted, means you will keep
trying, means you will never take all of the signs of your experience, they're showing you that
you can't actually fill that gap, no, can you satisfy your desires, you will never take that
as a sign, as an indication that actually hold on, maybe it's impossible, and even if you do,
you don't take it on a deeper level whereby it will make you stop going after it, people can
want to, on a shallow level, on a shallow mental level, they can realize, oh yes, sure, yeah, of course,
I mean, the life is pointless and it's, and you can't really satisfy your desires,
but they won't sink in, why? Because they don't make enough effort for it to sink in,
and why? Because they don't develop their behavior beforehand, as in as in practice virtue,
restraint and see like, then it will sink in, now it can't sink in because their behavior contradicts
it, the behavior goes against it, so no matter how much mentally you might be reflecting about
how the unsatisfying pursuit of desire is there, if your acts are still aimed at the pursuit
of desire, it means like, whatever you're thinking won't be much significant, because there's
no way to land, your actions are just swiping it all away, just pull immediately because they're
still going full power after desires, so you actually have to stop that first, endure that initial
pain, and then these reflections will be able to sink in and land on the proper ground,
that you created through restraint,
but that's the important thing to remember, the craving to, the desire to fill the gap is basically
the result of the desire to fill the gap, because something can lack
something else, only in regard to a different thing, if you know what I mean, so a gap is to be
filled only in regard to like a filled gap, in itself an empty hole, a gap is a thing in itself,
and there's no desire to be filled, but if you project the assumption of a full hole,
filled hole, leveled hole, completed hole, then this will seem incomplete, and because you
appropriated it, then you feel the pressure of that incompleteness, because you stick your hand
in it, it wasn't yours, you just wanted, you just can't know how to not make it yours,
so then you just become a victim of that pressure of fill it, fill that gap, satisfy the desire,
but in themselves, as I said, I go this well before, and itch, physical itch that you want to scratch,
in itself, it's just an itch, in comparison to the state that it's free of it,
oh, you feel pressure of scratching it, because scratching it might make it stop,
take, I'll bring it to an end, which is more pleasant, so then you follow more pleasure basically,
ah, so having a non desire, having a satisfied desire, it's more pleasant than having a desire
that is not satisfied, that is more unpleasant, and you will always pursue the satisfaction
desire, no matter how futile it is, no matter how much you know that it's futile, you will pursue
it for as long as you hold the assumption of the pleasure that you get through this eyes,
means you always go after it, because it's not, it's based on emotional level, you pursue pleasure,
so feeling a gap, you keep doing it, because you assume that doing it is more pleasant than not
doing it, but you fail to see that through doing it, you maintain that discrepancy,
because you keep projecting the discrepancy that's created by you wanting a pleasurable experience
of a filled gap, as opposed to a gap that's not filled, a hole that it's hollow, that it's empty,
but if you stop holding onto the assumption of a filled gap, then discrepancy won't be hurting you
anymore, thus there is no more pressure of desire, because an empty hole, it's a thing in itself,
a full hole, it's a thing in itself, a perception, yeah, and that's why that's why that's why
it's like in the similarly of scratching the edge, again, you maintain the edge
through constant scratching it, because through scratching it you prevent it from hitting it,
you keep maintaining that discrepancy through your right to scratching, so then it will keep it
ching, that's what I remember before, through pursuit of desire, you maintain desire,
it's as simple as that, it tells us like perceptions in pursuit of perceptions,
yeah, you perceive those are getting involved, the perception of a filled hole,
of a complete desire, it's inciting, it's pleasant, as opposed to doing complete,
and because you crave for pleasure, you go after that perception,
you stop craving for pleasure, then yeah, that is a more agreeable perception, that is a more
disagreeable perception, but none of them need to be appropriately because of that, and none of
them will be appropriate if you sort of relinquish the idea of that sensual pleasure that you get
through pursuit of such perceptions, that's why we said it's impossible to engage in sensuality
without sensual perceptions, because some people were claiming saying, oh, you can, you know,
you can be free from sensuality and still engage, I don't know, in an intercourse or various things,
because there was loads of brownish anesthetics sort of claiming the ultimate nibbana yet,
you know, having wives or whatever else, it was at least impossible, it's inconceivable to be able
to engage in sensuality, in an act of sensuality, without having those sensual perceptions
established before it, and as I said, the sensual perception are the distortion,
they choose you as such as real, so that's what you have at the time.
Here's a, this, a nature, a sub-pire, a sutra, one of six majima, in regard to the base of nothingness,
there's three ways to attain the base of nothingness, okay? And so it goes, again, because an
noble disciple considers us sensual pleasures here and now, and sensual pleasures in life,
in life to come, sensual pleasures here and now, sensual perceptions here and now, sensual
perceptions in life to come, material forms here and now, material forms in life to come,
perception of forms here and now, perceptions of forms in life to come, perceptions of the impotervable
and eger, all are perceptions, where these perceptions cease without remainder, that is peaceful,
they sublime, namely the base of nothingness. When he practices, in this way, in freedom he
abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in this base, once there is full confidence, he either
taint at the base of nothingness, now or else he resolves upon it with wisdom.
Yeah, the standard, you understand it, the rest is a kind of strange translation,
on the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possible that the evolving consciousness,
that's not the dodgy translation, it may pass on to rebirth in the base of nothingness,
this is the first way directed to the base of nothingness,
first way that you can attain that base of nothingness, so where these perceptions cease without
remainder, that is peaceful, that's the base of nothingness, so how do you,
where is the, where is that base of nothingness?
Well, perceptions are absent, but that's the thing, see, well, first thing I would point out
in regard to this, see, when he comes to base of nothingness, in similar descriptions,
people immediately assume, and that is thanks to the commentaries and contemporary Buddhism,
people assume it's often meditative attain, it's some sort of blind-town space start state,
but as you can adjust the little passage of that, it's quite clear that it's nothing to do
with that, because he said, he resolves upon wisdom, upon that state, which means you actually
understand it, you discern it, and that's not a meditative attainment, you know, in a conventional
sense of that word, it is, you can call that meditation, but that would be the right meditation,
and also another thing I would point out, the paragraph starts with the normal disciple,
with the right view has to be there, and if the right view is there, even such, again, in
vertical matters, meditative attainments are actually evolving on the right view and wisdom,
because that's what meditation is, cultivation of the right view that you already have beforehand,
so at this particular instance, in terms of the not, well, you can, you don't have to go as far
as the imputable perceptions, the point is, you recognize the nature of perceptions, so that's
where it starts, all the essential, the causes, essential perceptions, here, in the future lives,
then they're the form, the perceptions of form, here, in the future lives, then even the most
peaceful perceptions, imputable, regardless of the diversity of the form, the perceptions of
the imputable, means basically what you discern through the nature of perception, because that's it,
what's in common to essential perceptions, the perceptions of form, to the imputable perceptions,
as it says, they're all perceptions, they all share the nature of perception, as an aggregate,
and which means that discernment can be established on their level, perception is there,
you don't care what perception, you don't care if it's diversified or unified, you don't care if
it's imputable or not, perceptions, the mind is established upon that, and then, through the discernment
of the nature of perception, you can see, okay, it has a reason, even that sublime, refined,
imputable nature of perception, regardless of the particular manifestations of that perception,
that perception has a reason, as such, it sees without a reminder, when the time comes, and there
is nothing, so that nothingness can, it's sort of perceived in an indirect manner, you can't perceive
nothingness directly, but you can certainly establish your mind in regard to it in an indirect manner
by surmounting the sphere of perception, and that's done through understanding, through, like,
through real, correct, phenomenology, knowledge of phenomena, knowledge of the reason things,
which is what Dhamma is, not through, like, you know, watching the nostrils and then entering
the astral projection of, I don't know what, here is also upon wisdom, here is also upon wisdom,
he said, oh, he resolves upon, yeah, like, either he wants, once there is full confidence,
full confidence establishes his mind, right there and then, which means he's living it and knowing it,
or he fully discerns it and resolves upon wisdom, and then he also knows it.
Let's read the other two ways, because it might fall, again, because a noble disciple
goes, gone to the forest, or to the root of a tree, or 20 years, considers us, this is void
of a self, or what belongs to a self, when he practice in this way and frequently abides us,
his mind acquires confidence in this base, and avoidance, and so on, avoid off, so basically,
as I said, the experience, the inner and experience gives priority to the sense of self,
but with the right view, and, yeah, you go to physically to an empty room, the dissent,
it's factually empty, and you use that reflection as factual emptiness of this room,
it's the same mirroring situation of the emptiness of the sense of self in this experience,
so, see, it's a negative presence, this room is empty of others,
so others are present as absences in this room, others are absent here, so is this body,
so is this mind and so on, absent of this self, so the self is only a negative phenomenon in regard
to it, and if you start seeing it, the statue stops regarding it as yours, and you certainly
stop regarding it as a center of your experience, you're seeing things like the body,
empty yourself, it's not empty of body, it's empty, and it's empty of self,
it's got a room there, it's got a body of feelings there, but it's empty of this,
and that means that this doesn't exist, that's the whole thing,
so now if you say, this room is empty, self doesn't know, itself exists, as an absence,
as a thing that's not there, and that's enough for you to stop regarding it as yours,
and that's all it matters, so that's the phenomenon that you've taken to be yourself,
it's there, it's just not yours, that's a different way of saying that this experience here
is empty of this, my self, so the self is absent, and through that absence I can't own it,
because that absence is present, the absence of self is present,
otherwise you'll be able to designate it and talk about it, but by recognizing it that it's
absent means well it can't be yours, because if it's yours you'll have it all the time, so this is
an empty sense of self, and that's enough for you to stop regarding it as belonging to you,
then he attains the base of nothingness to you, well he attains the base of what
voidness is it, well no, once there's full competency he detains to the base of nothingness,
now or else he resolves upon it with wisdom, through the perception of voidness,
yeah, so basically he stops appropriating any perception, this room is empty of self,
thus through not being able to appropriate your sense of self there's nothing that belongs to you,
you resolve upon that, means nothing there arises, nothing manifests, I none of the perceptions
arise, no matter how sublime or diversified can be appropriated either, and that's pretty much
nothingness, but you can't see nothingness in a direct manner, only by semantic perception,
mind can get established upon nothingness, and you can demand the perception by resolving
upon wisdom of like over the sphere of perception, outside of the perception, and so again,
it's still even the resolving upon wisdom, it's still done, like you establish yourself upon
nothingness in that negative manner, through wisely surmounting the sphere of perception,
but it all revolves on appropriation, you will be the first example you gave of
sensuality and different perceptions and so on, impetervable or the voidness, again voidness,
oh, okay, it's nothing, nothing's there, nothing is there, nothingness, I was always
once you imagine, nothing, you know, well that's the thing, imagination,
if you mind this development in regard to your, or let's say more correctly, abstraction,
some imagination, because it's kind of based on the facts, but you're not really living those
facts, thus you're just abstract thinking, abstract thinking, it doesn't correspond,
so if your mind was to be established upon that abstract thinking, you will cease to be abstract,
you will become all, a valid thought that has served to establish your mind,
like what we spoke before, you use more general perceptions to abandon more particular,
more diversified, more troublesome, upon the perceptions of the forests, you abandon perceptions
of the village, which means whatever disturbance arises on account of perceptions of the village
cannot affect you, but the anything disturbance that arises on account of perceptions of the
forest that can still affect you, so you recognize that, so you go even higher,
what is the even greater perception of perception of forests and perception of earth,
so what, then in this case you can go even higher than that, you can say well what is the perception
perception of, the village perception of forest perception of earth,
their old perceptions, and perception is, and the reason thing has to cease, thus whatever
is perceived, whatever arises, has to come to an end, and that is, it is only upon that it's
the experience of nothingness, the perception of nothingness. Well, yeah, you can then start
discerning the perception of that nothing, so to speak, in regard to the positive perspective,
perceptions that you have semantic, because obviously there's a semantic of that perception as well,
but yeah, yeah, there is higher than base of nothingness as well. There's a third way to take,
nothingness, basement. Again, because the noble disciples considers us, I am not anything belonging
to anyone, anywhere. Well, what did they say just before? It's all about appropriation,
belonging. Yeah, no, is there anything belonging to me in anyone, anywhere,
yeah. When he practices in this way, if he can hear by and just asks, he's mind acquired confidence
in this base, or just full confidence, he attains to the base of nothingness or result. That's
the most refined way that would be, because it really points out the appropriation, the belonging,
taking as mind, which is what I've been talking about so far. The first one is just
sensuality. What was the other one? Essential perceptions?
Essential pleas. Perceptions of form, and then perceptions of impetervable. Yeah.
All of that already implies me and mind. For the second one, it's a bit more personal, so it's
oh, these perceptions here, this room, as this room is void of others, so this is worry,
but the third one, it's even more pointed out to just that experience of mind, not even necessarily
the fully blown sense of self, but either way, whichever you take, if you develop it, it will
lead you to that surmounting to the point of perception of nothing, that being established
upon perception and nothingness. So by having nothing, like nothing here belongs to me,
or do I belong to anyone, nothing in the future would belong to me, or will I belong to,
nothing in the past has belonged to me, so that's not possible. And it's not possible for anything,
so it's not that I didn't belong to me, but it could. Well, it says nothing in the future,
that's what it means, means a present possibility. So nothing in the future will belong to me,
is it's impossible for things to belong to me, and by truly permeating your whole experience
with that recognition that ownership is inherently impossible.
You surmount the entire sphere of ownership, which is the sphere of perceptions,
the sphere of things that you can perceive, including abstract, remote, ambiguous thoughts,
the appear as such you can add to the idea of ownership as mind, but fully cultivating this attitude,
eventually it will permeate and saturate your experience entirely, in all of its sort of
proliferated branches, so to speak, and that ownership of faith,
is just because you recognize that the only reason you were entertaining the oceans of ownership
was by not fully, not emotionally understanding that you were not able to own them in the first place.
That's why you were owning them. You were appropriately in them because you didn't know that you
actually can't. It's appropriation is inconceivable. And the stopping of that pursuit is,
well, it's a result of that. Well, then pursuit will become equally inconceivable,
because the entire nature of pursuit was based upon that misperception.
When it goes on, it goes on to say that the base of neither perception or non-perceptions.
It's the highest. So, as I said, negative, like what I gave these on before,
the perceptions of forest, when you're in the village, your mind gets established
upon perceptions of the forest, and when you're into the village, that perception of forest becomes
a negative perception in regard to the current perceptions of the village. Because your mind is
still established upon that perception, which is being perceived in a negative manner,
nothing bothers you in the village, which you can perceive, which you might perceive.
Then you recognize, okay, so I don't mean the forest when I'm in the village, if I'm established
upon the perceptions of the forest, I'll be free from disturbing in the village,
but not from the disturbance in the forest. And then the negative perception in regard to the
forest and the village further down, it's the perception of earth, the entire earth, the element of earth.
But that's a negative perception in regard to these more particular perceptions,
or you can see more general perception. But it's a negative when you're perceiving other things.
So, it's not there, it's present as an absent perception, and that's ultimately nothingness.
She is that very nature, of that very principle. Quiet to me. Oops, sorry.
So through cultivating the negative perception, you might get resolved upon it and establish
in it. But even that is a perception in that negative manner, in that indirect manner, it's still
our perception. Thus, neither perception or not perception would be state that goes even
beyond that perception, of nothingness, of the absence, of the absence of the general yet.
So as this village is absent of any forest, the perceptions of forest,
so is this entire body that are now using this particular level walking through a village,
is also absent of any owner, of any self that actually owns it, or are the more specifically,
more precisely, as the third example says, of any belonging to the sense of self,
or whatever arises in regard to it. Thus, the sense of self, or rather that which is taking
to be the sense of self stays there, but it loses its ownership, loses its belonging thus,
it's not really self anymore, so it's not yourself. And then you can surmount
negative perception and no perception through the entire cessation of perception and feeling.
I can't. Because it asserts when that big, when that big, who clings, assumes.
He assumes to the best object of assumption, because he is the best object of assumption,
namely the base, neither perception. Because if you assume, if your upadana is based upon
neither perception or perception, meaning the mind has been developed to such an extended,
connection descendant state, which means all of the more diversified states have been abandoned,
and you cannot entertain any notions of ownership in regard to them. In the same sense,
when you learn, and you get established upon the perceptions of forest and wilderness,
the idea of a crowded place, the mind just will not go there.
But imagine if you establish it to such a fine point, refinement whereby you surmount the perception
in its entirety. Well, that is a sublime. And yeah, you can assume that, you can be kind of
entertaining certain assumptions in regard to that, but that means that all the other assumptions,
all of it. Not just the course ones, even the ones that regard the relatively non-course have been
abandoned. So yeah, that is the place. If you want to cling to something, develop your mind and
cling to them freely, because actually there isn't much there to cling onto.
Yeah, there's a result of that. You will abandon all the other more dangerous assumptions.
Yeah, because it says when someone is practicing for nibbana, they need to abandon that.
Yeah, here because practicing thus, it might not be, and it might not be for me, it will not be,
and it will not be for me, what exists, what has come to be. That's basically abandoning.
Yeah, so there is, developing that reflection. They are not just, because as we said before,
so yeah, it's not just the faith that you can on now, faith is to recognise that even a possibility
of ownership cannot occur. Because you might think, okay, I don't know anything now,
but you can still entertain implicitly, or I'll testively assume within that,
ambiguous, simply assume by not looking at it. You end up assuming that
tiny little remote possibility of ownership is still might be possible.
And you will entertain that by default, simply by not entertaining it, but not looking at that
possibility as impossible, you will automatically entertain the notion of that possibility.
So, the reflection, it might not be, it will not even be possible for it to be for me, let alone
be for me now. So, you really pervade, so to speak, the whole sphere of nature of possibility,
which is much subtler than anything a reason present in front of you. So, I have this present
thing, I don't know anything, but you still entertain the possibility of ownership.
Even if you never give in to it, you might entertain it for the rest of your life,
but if you want to pay this for Nirvana, an ultimate relic, you start really targeting,
so to speak, those possibilities. Because, okay, it's obvious I don't own anything in front of me
around me, anything in the past, see I couldn't have kept it, but you can still cherish tiny little
notion of maybe just the possibility of ownership as an abstract idea, even that, but that will be the
point that you're touching, the point that you're interfering with, the point that you didn't let go of.
But if you practice, it will not be, it cannot be for me, it's impossible for it to be for me,
it's just inconceivable, no matter what, when in the future, how far, how long in the future,
it's just, it's impossible for this domain to touch, to come together and establish belonging,
it's inconceivable. And you practice that long enough, presently, right here, right now,
in regard to the future possibilities, and, yeah, that is Nirvana.
Yes, well, again, this is what I meant, but again, the possibility is,
the possibility is, yeah, okay. And as you can see, that gap can obviously stretch to
very refined levels, you know, you can, you can surmount, and even protrusion, I can surmount the gap
of sensual craving, but the gap of, like the future, only like the possibility of ownership can still
be very much maintained. But by recognizing that that gap is insurmountable, that it's impossible
to fail, impossible to bridge, you stop trying to build a bridge, you will keep trying to build a
bridge, for as long as you think it's possible for it to work, it's possible to build it,
you remove it, or rather you remove the hope, the notion of that possibility, you fully understand
it as, oh no, this is impossible. And then all the efforts to build a bridge, just, you don't have
to then, you automatically, they stop, they disappear. But all the key thing is all the suffering
ends. Of course, then, yeah, yeah. Because the result of the suffering was craving for the bridge,
and you think that the bridge will give it all the suffering, but in fact,
but you were suffering because of you were basically trying to build that bridge, trying to gap,
trying to surmount, trying to cross, that's which is impossible to, trying to connect that which is
well, in connectable, yeah. And as you can see, simply through thinking that it is possible
to build a bridge over that gap, of your existence, you appropriate it, you appropriate the other
sure, you appropriate the possibility of being on the other side, where that bridge is built,
and the whole thing has been, has been filled and connected and unified. But through seeing,
now this is impossible, you stop entertaining the notions of, or the other side of the gap,
of ownership. And you can see, through ownership, you maintain the notion of building a,
of crossing, of building a bridge, or through the efforts of building a bridge, the assumption that
it's possible to be able to fill that gap, you keep, you keep assuming the ownership of,
of the result of filling that gap, of that, of that other side, that you can cross here and
not bridge it, yeah. So even if you, yeah, even if you don't necessarily try and hear it now,
even in practicing restraint, the failure you maintain in the notion that it is possible to connect
with that other, at the side of that gap, means you are still very much within the assumption.
You're choosing not to. Even if you're choosing not to, yeah, you still own the other show,
through the possibility of, oh, I can cross there, to building this bridge over this insurmountable gap.
You fully descend, it's insurmountable, you reckon that was, that is peace, the peace was not
unifying broken pieces or whatever else, the peace was abandoning them all.
Because if you have broken pieces of a vase, for as long as you hold onto the perceptions of a vase,
those pieces will be, well, will be valuable, will be useful, it will be
object of your effort to bring back the vase, to build it up as it was before, or whatever notions
you might entertain, or emotional attachment towards it. But if you say, I don't care about it
anymore, all those pieces become literally worldless, entirely. So when you, and especially when
you recognize that you can't have the vase, and well, you couldn't have had it, because if it was
truly your vase all the time, you wouldn't have been broken in the first place. You have been
full control over it, but it's independent of you. In the same sense, this gap that you're trying
to surmount by pursuing your designs, it's independent of you, thus it's insurmountable, thus only
through the notions of surmounting it, you are yourself fully responsible for maintaining the constant
presence of the desire. You stop maintaining that desire of fate, causing these maintenance.
That's when you really said, the object of desire is more desire.
So the sole purpose of desire is the presence of desire.
You don't see that, because desire kind of tricks you by projecting your look. That's what
you're desiring for, so you don't see the nature of desire, because you're focused on a particular
manifestation of it. You know that desire is ready for food. Yeah, desire is filled by itself,
by being a desire. That's fine with itself, only through the discrepancy which you then assume
feels incomplete, but your full response is there for that. So you know how people, the notion
is there's a desire, and obviously there's a projected discrepancy of a fulfilment of desire.
If I do this and this and this, my desire will be fulfilled. So then you crave for that,
and that's how you maintain the notion of desire. So you could equally, so to speak,
fulfill your desire by forgetting about your desire. So you feel like, oh if I pursue my desire,
I fulfill my desire. Equal to that pursuit, you could equally do that, just forget about your
desire, and your desire will be equally fulfilled, because you must fulfill to begin with desire in
itself, it's a very phenomenal reason and such, perfectly sufficient by itself in itself.
But the discrepancy created is in regard to another projected scenario that it's incomplete in
regard to this, but in itself it's quite complete. So if you were to forget about the scenario,
the discrepancy is forgotten about, thus desire is complete. It's easy, it's gone.
It's just forgetful, you can't just forget. Well no, what I mean, forgetting about desire,
it's restrained. Yeah. Because by restraining, you stop pursuing it and then it falls off and
then you start thinking about something else. Yeah. Oh my desire. Oh, if you can, if you can
selectively forget only about desires, but don't forget about your forgetting, that's all right.
Yeah, we fulfill all your desires by restraining. Yeah, yeah, it would, they would be true for
family, it would bring all desires to an end to the cessation. So you cure your age by not
ditching, by not scratching, because scratching makes his making worse. Is that simple? It's just
most people are not strong enough to persist in non-scratching.
But the reason they're not strong enough is because they don't practice, they don't develop strength,
and thus, they're fully responsible for being weak, for being unable to restrain. Thus, they're
fully responsible for being poor by their desire. Yeah, I was, I was going to the beginning of that
sutra, the nature, supine, and it would have started with the biggest, central pleasures,
impermanent, hollow, false, deceptive. They are illusory. The Prattle of Fools.
Central pleasures here and now, and central pleasures in life to come, central pleasures,
perceptions here and now, central perceptions in life to come. Both alike are Mara's realm,
Mara's domain, Mara's bait, Mara's hunting ground. When I count to them, these evil unwholesome
mental states such as covetousness, evil will, and presumption arise, and they constitute an
obstruction to a noble disciple in training here. I don't know what presumption is.
Well, I don't know what a parable it is. If he traces it, I know that. It doesn't matter,
you get a context from the other. But when he, when a Biku considers our central pleasures here and
now, and so on, constitutes an obstruction in the training, suppose I go to abide with the
mind abundant and exalted, having transcended the world and made a firm determination with the mind.
When I do so, there will be no more un-evil unwholesome mental states.
And with the bending of their mind, my mind will be unlimited, immeasurable and well-developed.
When he practices in this way, and frequently abides us, his mind acquires confidence in this
place. And they become the know. The inter... the know.
Yeah, it requires development. And that's how from abstraction is brought down to the actuality.
If you read the first time, oh, it's his abstract, but if you actually start pondering,
discerning, establishing and understanding upon it, and then you abide in it frequently enough,
it becomes a know. And it becomes a state that your mind is attained.
It could also, I think she says, it is maras.
Maras fear.
It's maras stuff, those perceptions.
And what is maras thing?
And what does he mean by saying this is maras? It means it's not yours. It means it cannot be yours.
It means it's owned by another.
By mara. That's what it is. It's because people take them which belongs to mara.
Mara does with them what he wants. What do they take?
Or rather, what is it that belongs to mara? It says, I belongs to mara.
I phones belong to mara. Here belongs to mara. Sounds belong to mara.
Well, both the perceptions and the interity belongs to mara.
There would be someone saying that there is a self and there is a there.
No, there is a self, but it's not yours.
It's maras. Mara is the ultimate self.
She just had to stop regarding it as my end has this way.
The thing says, stop regarding that it is possible to be yours.
Even if you're not taking it, it might be possible.
You should start thinking, no, it will not be possible.
It is not possible. It cannot be possible.
So whenever the good it talks about the future and in this certain, it says,
any it will not be for me in the future.
Central pleasures here and now are central pleasures to come.
It doesn't matter. It's possibility of central pleasures.
It's equally impossible to be mine as much as these present central pleasures are.
And through abandon that possibility, you actually abandon the present.
Not that way around, because possibility is subtly than there is in actual aspects.
More general, possible it is more general. They are on the more general level here.
So the sense of self in regard to your senses, in regard to experience as a whole,
it's appropriate. It's regard dear and personal. It's welcomed, it's cherished, it's protected.
You do the opposite. You let go of it, you dismantle it,
you see that it's impossible to own it. And then that very sense of self, it's right here right now
in the center of your experience, no matter how vague it is, that sense of self, that's mara.
Right here, in your core, which wasn't your core. It was his core and it was his all the time.
That's how much I say, mara, I see you, I see you, you're doing this, I can see you.
They see themselves thinking that, but they know, because that's not appropriate anymore.
It's a mara, that's self is a mara, and that is his control, that is his domain, that's where
you control all the beings, because they're appropriate, that which is his, that which is him.
So it's his mara, just another way of saying it, it's like religion, it will be, well definitely.
Yeah, it's just basically, of Egypt personified.
Yeah, so you mean, so you don't see that's the thing, of Egypt personified,
but you don't, you can't get rid of that personification, because there will be a
appropriation of it. If you were to truly be able to get rid of the personality, so to speak,
means, well, there will be a person, you will be in control of it, but you can't.
So what we can do is stop regarding it as your own, and that is actually true, get rid of,
getting rid of. And that's when that personality, if it is owned, cannot be owned,
fully understood, discern that you cannot possibly own it, that's when it just becomes manifested
in the individuality, of these five aggregates arising, certain manners based on certain habits,
certain dry-up notions or whatever else, but no more, no more obedience, certainly, no more
person as in belonging to you or to anyone. This does not belong to me, nor to anyone, it's impossible
for it to belong. That's why Mara still comes to Buddha. Yeah, exactly, because that is Mara's
domain, but the Buddha is not there, so Mara can see it, or Mara can't see it in Aranya,
because he's just not there anymore, ever, even as a possibility, Aranya is not there anymore.
It's impossible for him to be there anymore, where Mara can see, where that personality can take
a grip of him again, it's impossible. The mind is what will be on it.
It's quite straightforward in a way, if the mind is developed to the proper discernment of
an arisenomy, be it a thought, a feeling, a perception of this kind of that kind, it's a reason.
You start training with that, well, all of these things will kind of fit into place.
And again, there's nothing to do with watching a nostrils and entering the mystical absorption
states. It resolves upon the wisdom. So, it resolves upon it with wisdom.
Do me a boy, come here. I like the way the Buddha, the sutras, ended.
And when he says this, this is meditator under, do not delay, or else you will regret it later.
Because there is no reason delay. You can't only try here right now, and that possibility of
future ownership is present right here right now. So, delaying it means obstructing it unnecessarily.
So, don't do it. Really, don't delay. Why for? The delay would come from that misperception that,
I would say, you got the sensuality, distortion. That's where delay comes from.
We have to keep on to maintain itself. The matter was to maintain it. It is controlled.
So, people think their thoughts are abstract, but it's actually other way around.
It's experience, present experience right here, that it's abstract in regard to thoughts.
Thoughts come first, mind comes first. But because, as I said before, because your experience
or potusion is so centered around the center self, that is the center of the universe.
Me and mine, I am the reference point to everything. That's the real.
That's the real, which means you're always bound with the senses, with the sensual,
with the material aspects of things and so on. Means that becomes your norm.
So, then even the most ordinary thoughts are regarded as, oh, this is just abstract,
because every thought seems abstract. I abstract it from your current experience that you're used to.
Thoughts seem almost unreal. That's where many people think thoughts are not real. I just
think my head. Because they got so bogged down in the sensual aspect of their experience,
their minds are so down in that domain, that sort of lowly sphere, that even the mere thinking
feels abstract. But that's only because they're so used to this sphere of sensual,
sphere of senses and domain of senses and control of senses. If somebody is to point out to you,
that as the wrong way around, to turn the picture upside down, and which is first,
you were putting second, well, somebody corrects that. Then you reckon, no, thoughts are the real,
thoughts are the center. The nature of thoughts, I don't mean just thinking any sort of nonsense
in regard to your senses. I mean, the nature of thoughts is the center of your experience,
and it's your experience that you're living, that is the abstraction from that.
If you stop doing, if you stop maintaining that abstraction, if you acknowledge the nature of
thoughts as present things that you could just designated, you will stop living that discrepancy,
that which is abstraction, which means by basically, by freeing yourself of the notions of abstraction
in regard to your own experience, you will be suffering less because they will be less discrepancy
created for such notions. So for Protuginum, thoughts are real. The rest of his experience
is an abstraction. It's a big mistake. It's a distortion, as the Buddha said, in terms of sensuality.
And because they're so bound with that distortion, they think that's the real thing.
And then that, which is, doesn't match it, in regard as well, this is abstracted from it.
You say, if I have the thought of nothing as thought of impermanable, the thought,
the image is the thought. If you dismiss it as just a thought, well, as I said before, you don't
just shoot yourself in a foot, you shoot yourself in the head, unless you seriously change the notion
because you'll never then recognize the nature of thoughts, which means you'll never then
recognize the nature of your mind, because mind is thoughts, tamas. I mean, damma, the capital D
is the knowledge of tamas, like the small D. It's the phenomenology, the knowledge of phenomena.
But if you dismiss anything that appears in your mind as just an abstraction,
you'll never look at it, which means you remain bogged down in sensuality, which is what you
have at the time of dismissal. Oh, you dismiss any helping hand, you're just going to stay drowning.
So when you have notions of the, nothingness, what we spoke about, that feels abstract in
regard to where your mind is, because your mind hasn't been developed. So don't dismiss it on
that account. Just start developing it in regard to that, which feels abstract. Because the
money development, the more you know about it, the less of that discrepancy will be maintained,
which means the less of the abstraction you will be living. So then you will understand,
and you will be able to think nothingness right away, and have your mind set upon it.
And as I said with the alternative option is, depending on person's background,
it is, he resolves upon it with wisdom. That means he doesn't necessarily need to
develop it and make it actual to the full extent, because he has such a precise wisdom
that when people would think abstractly, he would think correctly. Well, he would think,
the person has always been, would stand for that with nothing that is, and he would know that,
even without actually being there. So he resolves upon that with his wisdom. He resolves,
it is that. That is what nothingness is. And he resolves upon it. And because that is what nothing
ness really is, he gets results of freedom that would come by being established upon that nothingness.
And that is pain in liberty, that is deliberately liberated by wisdom. He resolves upon it with wisdom,
stays very long enough, all the fetters fall off. Then you have the other way,
he is liberating them both in both ways. We experience who touches it with the body as the
suttas will describe. That is when that discrepancy between living body and the senses,
not full faith. It is fully developed. Sorry, fully semantic, fully extinguished. But abstract,
it is only abstract, if that discrepancy is created by what you are used to, that doesn't match that
with your thinking. What is it? What is it? What is it? No, we can't go for a walk now.
Okay, take a crack, get out. Okay, go. Good boy. No, it was just done. Okay, now give it to the monkey.
So if some of your thinking feels abstract, don't dismiss the thinking, just take that,
oh, there is a work to be done. It's abstract only because my present experience, present bodily
experience doesn't match it. Can't comprehend it. Well, comprehend it and you'll match it.
But the abstract thought of nothingness is a sign. It's still a valid direction.
Based to what you read about nothingness. Like say somebody completely different,
doesn't follow any dharma, starts talking about nothingness. Well, then even that abstract thought
of that nothingness, these other different different different school teachers talking about,
won't necessarily be the right direction either because it's so much off. But if you read the
sutras and when the Buddha talks about nothingness, having the faith in the Buddha and so on,
then well, you can be pretty certain that you might not have experienced nothingness,
have certainly not been established upon it, but you can be pretty certain that at least the
direction where a abstract thought took you, it's probably the right one. Because it's, you know,
it's so vague in general, you really need to be seriously misled by instruction to go off that.
Now of course, there is a lot of work to go into that direction. But as I said, by reading the
sutras, you can be rest assured that, well, at least the directions through your abstract thinking
that you are getting in terms of the instructions are probably slightly right, which is why it's
important to have the right instruction, no matter how general it is. Now if you were not
to read the sutras, you could some other stuff where the present is Buddhism or not. Thank you
throw you off completely. But in this case, the sutras, the sutras, when you read, and that's why
if you keep reading about the sutras, you will be out any other input or explanation. If you,
obviously, with this kind of view, okay, abstract thinking is a direction that I need to develop
where it is, is to be abstract. Then if you keep reading the sutras, that direction will crystallize
more and more, because you'll be thinking about it, you'll be pondering it, you'll be, as the
others say, you'll be investigating meaning, you wouldn't believe me anything and turned, so you'll
be working basically, you'll be walking in the beginning like it then you go east, so you just
are going east, but you can go far off in many directions that are east, but you still keep going,
which means the further you go, it will start narrowing down, then you get more signs, more
instructions, then you recognize more of previous instructions that you heard that you couldn't make
much of at the time, which means your direction will get more and more focused and pointed out,
which means you get more precise. But none of that would be possible, if you admit, sorry,
if you dismissed the abstract thinking, it is very arising because it's just thinking,
it's just abstract, this is real, that's abstract, no, that's equally real, it's abstract only in
regard to what you think it's more real and you're a professional, thus you should not be trusting
what you think that it's more real, because if that is truly the real thing, you wouldn't be
trusting, you wouldn't be free from suffering, you wouldn't be allowed.
So don't dismiss abstract thinking, try to point it in the right direction through
leading settlers and things that are at least likely to be wrong, and then keep bringing.
Like, that's what I mean when I tell you, I have to be able to explain things to yourself,
don't leave them vague, undefined, yeah, it feels like this, sort of feels like, no, what does it mean?
No either meaning means understanding it, knowing that there is nothing to be understood in
these particular things means you understand them, and they are not worth understanding of pursuing
further. So that's why by reading this with this economy, you should be able to explain to
yourself, okay, so it still feels abstract when I think about nothingness, but what it is, what is
my, what is the meaning of it for me to that, at that point? What does it mean? How did I understand it?
It doesn't mean you start going to some like psychotherapy, spiritual terminology where you
should just start a while, it's like this, and it feels like, and it feels, no, what does it mean?
I'm not asking this guy how you feel, what does it mean? Where is your understanding yet?
And most importantly, is that understanding contributing to a freedom of suffering and freedom from
possibility to suffer? That is present. And if the understanding pertains to that, if understanding
feels directly related or directly correlated to the freedom from suffering, then carry on.
But if it's irrelevant, oh, I feel like this, or I feel like that, well, they make some
difference. Feelings there, that's your suffering regarding your feelings. Well, I feel,
I feel like, superman today, I feel untouchable, I feel impertellable. Well, great,
what are you going to do when you're feeling ceases? So you just establish your peace upon your
feeling, yet the whole problem of not being free, not being peaceful, is depending upon feelings,
being affected by them.
Yeah, that's up to you. No, that's not your peteo, that's what I mean. So don't just
give into any kind of flamboyant description of what you might feel like when you think about
nothingness. No, actually, develop it, so you don't suffer on a count of it. Otherwise,
the weather wouldn't have laid it as a way out of suffering. So if it doesn't pertain to a
freedom from suffering, means you're doing it wrong, or it's a wrong instruction, but it's
since came from the weather. It's not the wrong instruction, that's you're doing it wrong.
So it's always a good criteria of, okay, I've been pursuing this line of thinking in regard to
base of nothingness. I've been dwelling on the notions of this. Can I know, can I suffer less
on a count of it? And just like you, you're intelligence, you could see, this seems that if I were to
develop it, I would be untouchable by the unpleasant feeling when it rises, because they would also,
because feeling is inseparable from perception, and if I'm entirely surmounting the perception,
and free from it, and established in that base that's higher than that perception, none of the
feelings that arise on the count of that perception that can perceive can affect me because they
will pertain to perception, not to me, because I'm out of that perception.
So, yeah, it is strange.
Or even less extra. I mean, it's abstract for somebody who just reminds us far removed from it,
but again, as a thought, as a valid direction, it must not be dismissed in any cost.
Even if you don't necessarily follow it to such an extent, you can just go back to the obvious one,
upon the perceptions of the forest, your abandoned perceptions of the village, perceptions of
the crowded life, perceptions of the people, perceptions of centrality, to see the perceptions,
which have the flavor of freedom, the taste of it, isn't it?
Yeah, these perceptions are not clearly developed them, but it seems to me, based on my
limited discernment at this point, they're more likely to result in freedom than perceptions
of hanging on the village. So then, I should follow them. And then by following them,
you can close it to other perceptions that are there. And then you actually, oh yeah, no,
I was right. Where you define your taste of freedom, you gain confidence in the taste of freedom.
And then you know, oh, it is free.
Because if abstract thinking of freedom would stand for that, which freedom actually is freedom
from craving, freedom of suffering, what you have to do is keep repeating it, and you will be
resolved upon it. You're walking in that direction. Well, no, you'll be resolved upon it,
which means everything will be dragged into that direction, the rest of your experience,
because you anchored it there, and give it some time, and all the factors will follow.
And then you realize, yeah, this was right, even as an abstract thought, he was very accurate.
He's just always, I was dismissing it, because I was so centered at the opposite end.
But fortunately, out of faith and persistence, I kept doing it, and I headed the route,
and I headed anchor there, and look, all this, all this experience that was bogged down in
sensuality, the mind that was fully controlled, and just disturbed, and abused by centrality,
and everything else has been dragged out, and look, now it's there, where any perturbing ball is,
and all that swamp is abandoned. And that's abstract now.
You're thinking about sensuality, that you have full understood, as pretty much inconceivable,
it's impossible to own, that's abstract thinking, because you're abstracted from it.
So you can see how much harm can be caused by the casual Buddhist advice that you often read
and hear, or just stop thinking. Ignoring all the contradictions that are
said, sentence will imply, oh yeah, thoughts are the problem, I stopped thinking, and I'm at peace.
And you'll never try to think properly, and you certainly will never be able to, well,
to think, to develop your mind. And again, when I say things, I don't mean just sit and theorize,
or rationalize, what makes sense to you in your protrusion ascent that experience around your senses,
well, that the thinking is slave to the senses, but it's the other way around, or it should be, at least.
So developing the thinking is based on the suitors, however abstract, don't dismiss it,
but actually pursue their direction, and then it will cease to be abstract.
One thing for sure, none of these states,
it's based on nothingness, based on either perception or perception, one intent upon divana will be
arising by a chance, given to you by some meditative technique that kind of just made these things happen.
No, you develop them through discerning what they are, so then if you're a thought of what they
are, is accurate thought, that's it, you're rooted in them, now you have to keep doing it,
long enough until the fetters fade, that's the right view, the right view is the knowledge of
me, knowledge of freedom from suffering. Now you can pursue it or you can choose to be distracting
in regard to it, but you can't forget about it. So at most, in several lifetimes, you'll do away
with all the fetters, but maybe even before. Yeah, that's what it talks about, sort of patterns,
being reborn, no, all of them need to sit through seven lifetimes, some of them become lions,
before they land into another river, so like a loose translation, or a pond landing,
or in the space in between, all those polythumes, which means you could have taken to different
faculties and then even in that state in between, you carry on, you carry on the development of
the right view. Yeah, so at most, several lifetimes, but not necessarily. It's depending on how much
effort, how much effort you put into it. Yeah, how accurate your thoughts of what
nibane is actually are, because there is no, and that's one thing you realize,
what you think nibane is can be right or wrong, but you can't have a reference point
to it externally whereby you see, okay, there is a nibane and now I can correct my thinking, no,
because you can only see it from the inside, so you will know that this is the right thinking
when you're fully free from suffering, and then you're okay. That's why sometimes anagami
overestimated themselves, they thought they were fully nibane, but they were not quite,
because the things get a bit subtler later on, in terms of conceit and so on, so some people might
not necessarily see if the circumstances are not prompting them to see it, but the point is,
you can't have an external view of anything, which means then your abstract thinking,
or non abstract thinking, is all you have to stand for that thing, which you're aiming at for freedom.
That's what I meant in the S in not perceiving the feeling and determined determinations,
that because of which you have thoughts of that, because of which you have thoughts,
which means you can only think in regard to that, which you're thinking, but that's already
another thought that you're thinking, which means you can't step outside of your thought,
right along where you should dismiss it. So all you have to do then is make sure you stop assuming
that thought to be that, which it isn't, and then that thought will stand for that, which that
thought is. In other way, have an accurate thought of what nibane is, have an accurate thought of
what the way out of suffering is, have an accurate thought of what craving is, have an accurate
thought of what matter is, have an accurate thought of what feeling is, have an accurate thought
of what perception is, have an accurate thought of what intentions are, have an accurate thought of
what consciousness is. Because through any inaccurate thought, you introduce assumption,
because that's it, the discrepancy of inaccuracy is the extent of your assumption,
extent of your opinion.
