I was here a few days ago listening to your Yamato, and now I try to break this, but
actually I struggle to apply, to seeing the context of the situation that pay for a background
to speak.
It seems to me that what I do is like when I really remember the present moment, some kind
of impression, or so, whatever, thinking myself in the present, and then I try to
further into the context, but it seems more like intellectual exercise, like thinking
or talking to myself, okay, so I mean the situation, it is this problem which is given
to me, and talking like this, and I'm not sure that this is actually what I'm supposed
to do.
Can you speak a little bit about this?
Sure.
If something is abstract or intellectual, that is determined by your attitude.
Your attitude determines whether it's going to be abstracted from the present experience
or not, so if you know how to look properly, then nothing is abstract, then even turns
like the infinite space and either perception or perception becomes state that mind can
get established upon, because it's not divorced from it, I developed the knowledge of them
so you can get established in them.
But yeah, for somebody who's absolutely no concept, no recognition of it, it will remain
abstract.
So the point, like in simpler terms, for what you're trying to do, well first of all,
as I said, you can't force the background as a foreground, because I mean something
else is the background.
So you can only just recognize whatever is the foreground at a time, and then while
the foreground is present, simultaneously with the present foreground, you start discerning
the background very fairly, in regard to that foreground, but not over-intending the
background.
Not looking at the background directly, because then that becomes foreground, you just
attended it, which means then something else is very far out to your attention.
That's why it's so hard, because you can't attend both ends simultaneously, that will
require you to step away from them.
You can only attend one while the other is present.
That's why Nama Rupa returns to Vinyana when you look at Vinyana, when you look at Vinyana,
returns to Nama Rupa if you look at Nama Rupa.
You can't look at them both and see them, yes, none of this is mine.
So you can only learn while you're looking at Nama Rupa, for example, to discern the presence
of Vinyana in this sense, or just discern the background, without stopping, without
ceasing to look at Nama Rupa or whatever you're chosen to look at the time.
And that's how you develop knowledge about the peripheral, knowledge that that too is
determined by the foreground I'm looking in as much as the foreground is determined by
the background that is being generated by it, but you can't look at it to the same extent
and compare it to and say, okay, these both are mine, not self and so on and so forth.
So that's why it's so hard to, that's why it has to be repeated, on and on and on and
it's not like you're figuring it out intellectually, nor is it some sort of a mystical experience
where you just wait for some revelation.
It's just a mental drill, whereby you lock your mind literally to like a standstill for
a second, for a two, and you keep doing it, and you keep doing it, and you keep doing
it, until you start discerning, right, what's there in front of you?
But what you just said was that you're afraid you might become intellectual and sort of
not really, that's probably true in your case, because what, only three days ago you heard
about it, so you're going to take time to worry about, however, even if you're talking
to yourself, so to speak, it is slightly a crude manner of maintaining your mindfulness,
but you wouldn't be able to talk about things if they're not there.
I see.
So even you're talking to yourself is actually generated from the present situation, things
you're talking about.
So it's only a right that you then, that makes it kind of divorced from being remaining
rooted in the present situation.
So if you start talking to yourself present, you become mindful of what you're doing,
talking to yourself about these things, and you're not, and again, it's important to
say, it's important to stop expecting to find some sort of hidden kind of blitz of a
kind moment, oh yeah, I saw it, which is why people often expect that, well, they actually
take time to shake that off, because everything points at something like that, every meditation
technique, every practice, it's something you're going to see, no, it's not about seeing
it, it's about doing it.
And what you're doing apparently doesn't seem to have any result.
That's why people can't achieve it by accident.
That's why people can't develop their mind accidentally, because you might do it once
accidentally, or twice accidentally, or five times accidentally, but you see no apparent
verification, the putusion of what recognizes something worth pursuing, so you just think
of seeable that you would stick to it and keep repeating it all and all and all, unless
somebody a faith in tells you to do it.
And then you repeat it and you repeat nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing, nothing.
And then you look back and you realize, oh, actually, it's not nothing anymore.
My mind has changed.
And that's the similar that I've handled, how the work, the carpenter doesn't know how
much it has been wasted, but you just keep using it until it thins out, so just keep going.
You have to keep going and you have to keep in track with the patience, that kind of
expectation to, oh, I got it now, I had it, I had it for, I had it like for this second,
I did.
No, because the background remains, you just want to train how to start discerning it
as background, yes.
And if you start discerning it as background, as I said, you don't even need all these
suitors that we have, you'll need very few, and things will become clearer, because you
now have a basis for discerning it.
But if you pair, or that effort of discerning the background eye, effort of properly developing
mindfulness, if you pair that with bleeding the suitors and try investigating the meaning,
bleeding in the mirror, things like that that will make you think about it, then yeah,
you are basically making quite a problem.
Yes, I think you are nicely basically summarized the whole thing, yeah, that's what happened
to me that I was, you know, because it's something, you know, I was really expecting some unusual
things happening.
And, but Asric has said, it's kind of talking to myself and bringing it, am I not actually
bringing it to foreground?
Well, you are, that's the thing, so you might sort of talk to yourself as kind of picking
it up, but then you don't need to keep talking to yourself if it's still up.
That's when the suitors, when the monks who tried to understand something, they were kind
of, they say it's loud twice, so he's like, oh, first jauna, first jauna, what is first
jauna?
So they bring their mind kind of through that, after and through that designation, and
then the mind starts thinking about it, they don't keep saying, what's the first jauna,
what's the first jauna, what's the first jauna, what's the first jauna, because the mind
is directed, just like you're directed, and then you push it, so you obviously, that's
possible for somebody who's the other mind to that extent, then he can actually contemplate
on the basis of mindfulness.
So that's why it's sort of a practice really that's, as I said before, it's about doing
it, and that's again important to repeat, because if you focus on actually just repetition
and developing the attitude, then the content of the experience becomes secondary, it
comes irrelevant, then even if you have something, some lofty sort of sublime new experience,
now you're not fooled by it, you're not taken by it, you're not overwhelmed by it.
Why?
Because whether it's a lofty experience, whether it's low, whether it's mundane, whether
it's upper mundane, whether it's normal, whether it's a novelty kind of rare experience,
experience is there.
It doesn't matter what it is, which means you stop being concerned with your content,
which means you can't create those things, you can't create the nature or experience
is present, it's kind of indifferent, it's neutral, and that's how you also overcome
any mystical attitudes for any sort of mystical, pleasurable revelations and so on.
The revelations you get are revelations of your insight that are based upon efforts to
understand and understanding being developed.
I think it's very nice to summarize because I was basically doing all these years, I was
just being caught up in experience, it never somehow influenced reading these sutas or
whatever, it never of, you know, and it's there actually, but it never occurred to me
actually to look on the structure of experience.
Because structure of the experience is nothing other than the same nature of experience.
Yes.
And actually the Buddha said himself, that's what he called the whole teaching, he called
Dhamma in the same, using the same word, he uses for nature of particular things.
So it's Dhamma, Dhamma, with capital D, it's nothing other.
So then I'll understand what you are talking about, basically the past cannot be found
in the experience.
No, exactly, it's in regard to it.
Yes.
Yeah, it's by understanding the nature of that which appears, the nature of the fact,
and it's in others that I mean in many sutas, it's said by understanding the nature of
the five aggregates.
Yes.
There is no room for upadana anymore.
Yes.
You stop holding them.
That's what it is.
But it really never...
Well, yes, as you can see, it is simple, once you kind of get the notion of it, it's
like, of course, it's not complex, it's not elaborate intellectually, it's very, very
concise and very direct, but unless you see it, you won't see it why, because even if
somebody talks about it, general about the nature, saying nature of experience is peripheral
of experience, it's nothing else.
But even if somebody talks about it, if a person doesn't have the attention they can
span to the actual and peripheral, simultaneously present, I, if he doesn't have the only some
monocicura, the one they can include it, you'll be just seeing is another method, is another
thing, is another technique, is another foreground thing that he cannot hear to mechanically
and it will lead into results, he won't.
Yes, he won't.
So, you can kind of close the right instructions, but he won't read them rightly, he won't
understand them rightly, because he doesn't have, his mind doesn't have this span to recognize
that instruction applies simultaneously, but at different layers.
Yeah, yeah, you know me, I know you have two years or a day, so we already have two
discussions.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But just you listen, go actually, I just go at least, let's say slightly what you are
talking about before it relates.
In the whole, but it's no bother, for example, it first, exactly to that, to that simultaneous
presence of the two different sort of things in your experience, not to the same extent,
but the simultaneously present, one is foreground, one is better, now I'm looking at all of
the other, so it doesn't matter what a content of the foreground is, nor what a content
of the peripheral is, is nature of it, that's what the structure is, that's what it's
no bother.
So, you're going with it, with the grain of that nature, you go how it pushes you, you
go with the grain of Patissom Father, means ignorance is being maintained.
You go against that simultaneous sort of principle of that simultaneously present nature, you
go against Patissom Father, means ignorance is not generated anymore, so it's not, you
know, the content is relevant in a secondary sense initially, in terms of abstaining from
a wholesome content, an also engagement, things based on sensuality, ill will, but that's
just so that you can actually see through the nature of the content and then stop being
conservative, that's how our anger goes beyond good and bad, how people often like to
say, but so in that sense, you can transcend, you can sort of overcome any influence content
that can have over you, by understanding the nature of that, which contains that content.
So you just have to be sort of patient and really, keep sort of finding energy to do it, because
as I said, it's not, you know, you won't get any novelty sort of release energy, what
not, I don't know what people nowadays on the retreats, because it's really onto you
to develop it, and initially seemingly there is absolutely no, so that's why faith needs
to come first, you have faith that that's right, you try to also kind of supplement that
faith with any sort of intellectual clarity and understanding you can get in regard to
the message that you're supposed to be applying, and then you just keep doing it, keep doing
it and keep doing it and keep doing it.
But still, you can basically do your formal meditation, it's just about this little approach.
Yeah, sure.
Just can you say, Pihika, Ana Pana, Satya, or Nuts of the Bodhi, in regards to that, like
this and that.
Sure, sure.
Yeah, that's fun.
That's fun.
Because basically, you just, all you need to do is something that's not to distracting.
Yes.
When you're walking up and down, but you just go for a walk, or following the alaqa, obviously,
you know, here you might be more concerned after a lot to look up for, but say like in
England, you could just go on those country lanes for a walk, you don't think about where
you're stepping in that sense, and then you can just fully commit to the reputation of
that contemplation.
Because you remain in the present moment of the bodhi, everything is already there, given
for you.
Yes.
I think you need to work with, so you don't need to be sort of fabricating on top of
it and giving priority to some sort of focusing methods and things like that.
It's actually, as you can see, focusing works on particularizing whatever has a reason.
You don't want that.
You want to learn how to, like, see the general in regard to whatever it's already
particular.
Yes.
So you basically go opposite way.
You don't want to be caught up in the experience and be completely lost.
Whether you have pain in your knees, weird sensations in your back, itchy elbows, what
is in common to all of those things?
The bodhi is there.
You recognize that.
And that's a thought.
It's nothing other than a thought.
Yes.
It's a mental image.
Yes.
But if a mental image, if you're mindful of it, it will stand for that big bodhi is in
your present experience.
If you lose mindfulness, it becomes an abstract thought of your body.
And then you need to kind of reconnect it to your mind.
No, you just need to be mindful of it again.
And it will sort of re-emerge as that which your body is.
Because you can't know anything without a mental image in your mind.
Yes.
It's ritual.
It's, like, you can't even talk about something that will not exist without, because that's
already a mental image.
Yes.
A phenomena.
Yes.
So that's where you have to start recognizing things.
Not kind of following weird sort of itchiness and sensations in your body, because that kind
of seems like a solution because you actually forget about a problem.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Exactly.
And the thing is, sooner or later, depending on how much effort you put in, you're going
to get used to it in a particular way of looking at things that are focusing and then
novelty and the release of that novelty kind of a new thing, it's a new discovery, it's
going to fail.
Yes.
So then you need to do it harder or find something else, or go on a longer retreat, or become
even stricter, be personal, practitioner or whatnot, just to intensify further or more.
But you just keep going further and further and further in that wrong direction.
Yes.
This is an infrastructure.
And that's how in the soup, as you can have somebody understand, just even without any
of that, just by his word, because understanding is in that general level.
So if he understands things right, he leads to the nature, he might not necessarily be
mindful, obviously he's had a mindfulness for some degree, for the mind to remain present
and compose, some sort of somebody, for him to see things clearly through that understanding
and through that instruction.
So that's where the somethings they would just discuss, the Dharma and mind would end
with somebody based on the discussion, based on some sort of, you know, sharing of the
mutual energy that's kind of passes from me to you, you know, just understanding the
same setup, the same structure, the results in mind, reaching in equilibrium.
So can we still define mindfulness as a values of the present or among the experience?
Yes, but mindfulness sort of should allow a degree of forgetfulness as well, of the present
moment.
So it's not just like a constant and present, and present, and present, and present,
because whether you do a present, even when you're forgetting is in the present moment.
So you want to discern that, that's how mindfulness becomes unshakable, whereby when you forget
things and come back from it, the base is, it remains unaffected, because whether you
forget, you forget in the present moment, whether you think about the past, you think in
the present moment, where you plan about the future, you plan in the present moment.
So actually, it's not optional for you, you are stuck in the present moment.
Yes.
So the definition of that, but people don't recognize that they try to fabricate it with
a effort and with a forceful attention, a present, a present, a present, a present, one,
two, three, four, five, four, four, four, four, four, four, four, one, two, no.
Your present means things are already enduring, so it's the discerning of those three characteristics,
rising in mindfulness, sitting in mindfulness, position of changing in mindfulness, mindfulness
is established.
Yes, absolutely.
No, by active effort, because you're already there, your effort is done present here.
Yes.
Whether I want or not I'm in the present moment, fully understanding that, that cannot be,
that cannot be disturbed, even when you, when you forget about things.
And then when forgetting and remembering, ceases to sort of induce ignorance in a sense
of you forget the things in you, you forget, that you are not a center of experience,
you forget the things don't really need you for they're operating, the five-hour-day
things exist, what, without you really, if you forget those things, then when you remember
you remember with yourself, you remember with your craving, you remember with your conceit.
So that's why the mindfulness needs to be developed to the extent necessary.
So the knowledge of forgetfulness and non-forgetfulness needs to be developed to the extent necessary
to include both, so the neither will induce the confusion from beforehand.
Yes.
Yes.
So also it seems that basically thinking or thought is just, it can be used as another,
let's say, object.
Absolutely.
You know, it's in the same, but still seems to mean that the body is actually better.
Well, you have to start.
I think starting with the mind will be too, too hard, you know, as the Buddha said, to
general can, you know, understand the nature of the body and even this, remove any passion
in regards to it, but understand the impermanence of the mind and so on, it's too hard, because
it moves too quickly.
But it's the same principle, it's the same nature.
Yes.
So you don't want to start with the body because energies are hidden in the body and
you're going to release some trapped ignorance that's somewhere in the body.
No, you start just because it's easier to see, but you do extrapolate the same principle
and start applying it to your thoughts, because ultimately it's the thoughts actually.
If you want to deal with something, they will deal with both your mind and your body,
you need to deal with your thoughts, but it's too hard.
So you begin with the obvious thoughts of your body, so that you can start seeing the
nature of thoughts.
So then thoughts of your mind, thoughts in the mind, thoughts that are not necessarily
concerned with the body, that can also be included through understanding the same nature
of a thought.
Yes.
And do you have access to body always through the mind?
So yes, that's not the question kind of already implies a certain answer.
The body is there.
The only way you can have the experience of the body is because of the mind, which means
the mind is then cannot be separated from the body.
Yes.
But the body, when you can't even say the body, if the mind is not already there, so in
that sense the mind comes first, it defines it, it designates it, yet if there is nothing
there, the mind would not be able to designate anything.
That's why there is the form rupa that is necessary for the whole presence of nama and
that designation.
Yes.
So there needs what?
There needs…
Yes.
The problem is now, I see when I said there is rupa, when you think that thought there
is rupa, you think that's the actual rupa, but no, that's just another nama in regard
to that, because of which that nama is there.
Yes.
So you have… that's how you start conceiving the rupa in the experience, when the thoughts
in regard to rupa are regarded as that which rupa is.
So if you experience rupa, if you experience body, it's not the body.
Well, no, you know that's a problem already, now you're denying rupa, which is another
form of affirming it.
Like basically he conceives form, he conceives in form, he conceives apart from, no, it's
not the body, it's the body, it's not the body, it's both the body and not the body,
it's neither body nor not the body, either way he keeps referring to the body, which he
still means, means basically still assumes that he can relate to that which body is eye,
he can relate to that rupa, but thinking that you can relate to that rupa, you already
conceived it as relatable.
So you must visit it very thoroughly, what you are talking about.
Exactly, you can't get it in a moment, because that's already the product of your conceiving
or misconceiving.
So you need to understand the peripheralism whereby in thinking there is just thinking, in
seeing there is just seeing in her, there is just her eye, there is not too much or too
little of it, there is not given to the rupa or taking away from it, it's just fully understood
that this thought stands upon the basis that rupa is, but even that thought does not for
you induce assumption that that's what that rupa is, because that one, basically that would
be overshooting the mark, there will be like you accessing that which you cannot access.
And by not knowing that you cannot access, you access it, and that's how you maintain
its existence, that's how a rupa finds a footing in your experience, you create it, you
give it, you maintain it.
Very good, very good.
But I'm glad it's clear.
And what I have, another thing, you know, I lost the, you know, I lost the, I lost the
point, that I have the point, now it's okay, let's see, my comeback, so we have to think
about it, to think, to continue in her thoughts, to find experience, oh gosh, that's a question.
Coming back to the structure of experience, what I, now, we have this three characteristic,
and what I got from you is basically that, the understanding of them comes, all of them,
it's not like a sequence, because I was thinking that you must, by understanding Anichar,
to ask the little car, and then you go to the next one to understand, no, no, no, it's
one insight that you can develop, it has these three characteristics, so you might not
necessarily be equally discerning all the characteristics, but you see them all, to
some extent, hence the insight is there, it's same with the four normal truths, it's
just four aspects of the one thing, not like one, and then you go to second, and then
after a few days you reach the third, no, it's basically just four ways of laying out every
aspect of that one insight, which is freedom from suffering, the one who is free from suffering
knows what the suffering is, if he doesn't know what the suffering is, he wouldn't be
able to be free from it, he knows how that suffering arises, he knows how that suffering
came to be, he knows how that suffering ceases, and he knows what he needs to do, and that's
all in one insight, but if you want to teach that one insight to somebody, this is the
ultimate way, the most accurate precise way to lay it out, as for aspects they need
to be covered, that's why I forgot, when he breaks it down to free, you need to develop
free, and the kind of four normal truths become like 12 parts of steps, so to speak, where
every truth needs to be developed fully, so you realize to understand, so you have the
four aspects, if you fully develop four aspects, and each aspect can be developed threefold,
and then you get 12, so in that sense you get 4 and 12, but it's not like one, two, three,
four, five, it's just one insight, it's describing four, and each of those describing three
other ones, two people, whose mind can discern that far, but ultimately all you understand
is arising of suffering and freedom from it, which is again, in order to be free from
suffering, you need to recognize the suffering as a reason, and as a phenomenon you have
to recognize it for what it is, but some aspect can be more prominent, can be, what sure,
you might be clear in some aspects, but that means basically there is still some ignorance
left in regards to it, so if you fully develop all four aspects, you'll be an arant, which
means Arya does not have all four aspects fully developed, he has them to some extent,
but he has them, he has the four normal truths, and are they necessary, yes, yes, yes,
well no, that's just an approach, that's just an approach, yes, the one that do the four
aspects become arant, no, it's not necessary in a sense, you have to, as I said, it's not,
it's not a fixed method, it's just one goal, as I would have said, you only teach your
suffering in freedom from it, as the ocean has only, does it taste the salt, no matter where
it is, so he's teaching freedom from suffering, that's it, so no matter what approach you
take, no matter through what suit you arrive at understanding, no matter how different
you might sound, those are not all methods you have to cover, they all point at the same
thing, so if you arrive at the same thing, that's all it matters, so if somebody arrives
at the same thing to the contemplation of the nature of suffering, craving in regard
to it and so on, then he becomes free from suffering, he becomes an arant, he full of it,
that's it, if somebody, you know, with a different mind arrives during the standing of this
single tennis principle, which is a particular part of the actual emperor, he becomes free
from suffering, it's the same result, that's why sometimes, that's when he never meant
that sometimes even people with the right view might actually hesitate if they were to
distract but teach his own father as twelve factors, because it's a subtle thing to see,
and they might have arrived differently at the freedom from suffering, and then they
never thought of a teachable father in that relevant manner, they thought it all, it's
with some explanation and they don't care about it, why, because they arrived at freedom
from suffering through some completely different approach, again, from the suitors, that's
why they have arhands with like different extents of the wisdom, some have arrived only through
like a single kind of approach, they've really committed to it, had faith in, some arrived
through discernment of many different approaches that kind of brought mind to fulfillment, and
their wisdom, basically wisdom is great, that's why they can teach better, they can understand
better, but not all of them can, but some of them can only teach in the manner that
they reached, but it doesn't mean that they are less, because the Buddha said it doesn't
matter how you reach it, or how why you have to circle in order to reach it, the point
is to reach it, so that's why the faith type, the wisdom type and the kind of meditation
sort of translation, meditation type, one through samadhi, none of them is better than the
other, the one who is the best is the one who becomes an arhand, and then you can come
an arhand on the base, do these three things, so it's not like, oh, he's a better arhand
because he arrived through wisdom, and then he's a worse arhand because he arrived through
faith, no, both are arhands, that's all it matters, yeah, they're good, and they're also
talking about this anichar, can you say it again, what is actually anichar?
Again, because it would be hard to undo the notion of material sort of scientific impermanence
because people say it's impermanent, they expect its destruction, and they often use that
as a proof of impermanent, once something has been destroyed, you say it has truly
looked up, these things are all impermanent, but you not just that that doesn't make any
any kind of relevant sense for the freedom of the sense of self, but also you can't even
apply it in that sense because it would require you to kill yourself, to destroy yourself,
to see yourself as not yourself, so in order to see or not self, you need actually you
require the phenomenon of self, to see it as not belonging to you, but if you destroy
it, even before you see it, means you completely sort of, well, you entirely, just entirely
block your own problem, you can't possibly remove any basis for discernment of that particular
thing, so you should really think anichar, as I said, it's a kind of wide basis, like
in Sanskrit, it means everlasting, but even the definition by the way of permanent, if
you look at English definitions, that means lasting until it comes to an end, so it has
permanent presence until it disappears, so the whole ocean of eternal gets kind of creeps
into that sense of self and then, oh, eternal, non-internal, and so on, but even that can
be too abstract for people, so the more practical level, if you want to look at anichar, means
basically out of your control, that which is present but cannot be owned, cannot be truly
in your possession, in your mastery, and you recognize everything accesses that degree
of resistance, to some degree, everything accesses resistance to some degree to you, which
means everything shares the nature of anichar to you, and it's that varying degrees of
anichar that confuse people in thinking that things that are kind of accesses in less
of an independence kind of resistance attitude towards you, you confuse them as yours, because
it's resisting you less, but it's not a question of not resisting you at all, it's just
a question of basically things are impermanent and less impermanent, but they're still impermanent.
In other words, things are out of your control, some of them more so, some of them less so,
but fundamentally none of them is fully in your control, and that's all it takes just
to recognize that then, oh, so then this whole motion of self, there is the notion of
absolute control, there is a self cannot be based upon partial control, if self recognizes
partial control elsewhere, means it's taking full control somewhere else, that's why
it's established upon, so you might dismiss everything saying, oh no, this is mine because
I don't control it, but maybe that very thought is something you think you control, so
you send the self remains and then getting to that, so that's why you need to include
a peripheral of the general nature whereby you kind of scoop it all up and then discern
it within that, because if you keep chasing where yourself is established you won't find
it, because it's always going to slip to the next thing, so again, a nature as that
sounds like the nature also as one of the meaning is there an internal, personal, personal,
so contemplate the nature of personal, take something that you always is personal, if
you were to say that, what do you refer to, but what do I refer to personal, and you
would see kind of fuel to describe it phenomenologically, that experience, you would be referring
to something that's close, almost inside, in relation to the outside, it's something
right here, so that's why it's personal, that's why you took possession of it, that's
why you guard it, that's why you kind of shelter it, but if you recognize that none of
the things can be personal in that sense, that's how you discern it, and that's what
any change, but recognizing that none of that can be personal, that any of that can
come to an end at any time, and you recognize that while the thing is still present, that's
how you sort of, while you recognize danger, you're holding onto something that will sort
of pull you to death because of you holding, not because you have to die, just because
you're gripping onto it, so you recognize that all of these things that I hold there,
for that very reason, just for that very reason, can't be a result of my demise, and that's
very dangerous, but at the same time it becomes very liberating, recognizing that because
then you let go of it, so even if you keep surrounding the video possessions and stuff,
none of them will be regarded on that personal level, so if something happens, if you lose
your house, if you lose this, if you lose your friend, that's it, the mind will not be
affected, you won't be shattered by that, because it has withdrawn, recalled away from it,
before it disappeared, before it took you away, and that's what any change is, that's
where, again, automatically by recognizing an issue, properly, you recognize that suffering
in it, just for that reason, not because you might be a very good thing, might be a very
happy thing, family, children, all that, by automatically simultaneously better, by
recognizing suffering, you don't regard that as dear, you don't regard it as personal,
you don't regard that as mine, you cannot possibly, because in order to have that attitude
of mine, that lingering notion of mine belonging to me, you need to see as personal, you need
to see it as dear, you need to see as worthy, as pleasure, as non-painterous, so can you
say that actually, you know, what you consider to be self is not yourself, if I summarize
the whole point, so the only point is just, so, to summarize it more accurately, but you
can see that, that which you take to be yourself, is a real thing, that's what I want to
ask, you just have to remove your sense of ownership in regard to that notion, yes, so
that notion is still basically there, but you don't consider it, but you can't see that
notion directly, that's why this whole point of training your mind in peripheral recognition,
that's how you start including that vague notion of self, that vague notion of ownership,
that vague notion of master external to this, you start including into that peripheral
that you see it's present while the actual has a reason, so if the mind becomes established
in that peripheral, you realize self never appears as a direct object, because it wouldn't
be the self, which means in order to tackle the self, you need to see the self, you need
to see the phenomenon yourself, in order to see the phenomenon yourself, you need to learn
how to see an ambiguous phenomena, as ambiguous phenomena, not over define it into that which
you expect it to be, but basically see how it has a reason, it's kind of weird, kind of
hard to decide, put in world, hard to put a finger on, notion sense of self, of master,
that might have kind of a memory of your face attached to it, or something like that,
but anyway, it's a sort of ambiguous phenomena, the nevertheless is present as such, so
learning how to see peripheral, you learn how to recognize this phenomena for what
they are, so then when you see there's that peripheral, you don't need to feel it, you
don't make it actually, you don't redefine it, you don't need to destroy it, or you need
to stop regarding it as yours, and then utter becomes un-attacked, that's it, this self
becomes not self, it doesn't become no self, like there was never self, no there was,
if there was never self, you would not have the self, so it's just a mistake of ownership,
that's when you never said when a person disappears, but to a general, when they sent
out of either disappears individual remains, so that vague general notion basically might
remain, but it won't be regarded as this supreme master of experience, and above all,
it won't be regarded as independent of the five aggregates, it won't be regarded as
an independent of the experience as a whole, actual and peripheral, it will be seen as
just the basically sort of kind of unnatural, natural center of actual and peripheral
of the tensorism on its own, that's when individuals vary, individuals are different,
some people sort of are, like Arahans vary, they don't turn into the same identical blank
five aggregates, different individual, different preferences, different notions and so on,
but there is no assumption in regard to the individual, assumption of ownership, assumption
of self, and then obviously assumption of the self view as a completely independent sense
of self, completely independent of any of the five aggregates, it's sort of a manager
and master of them externally, ties in together nicely when you're speaking from the
same thing, it's the same thing, it's not like many different sort of all, wow, that's
really clever, no, it's just one thing, explaining millions of different ways by the same thing,
the same point, the same principle, the same image, so to speak, yes, yes, yes, yes,
but you want basically see that that point is not just like object of your thinking, but
it's pointing to the structure of the idea, is that clear, is that clear, yeah, that's
very basic way, from other questions, yeah, because if it's, if it's just an objective
thinking, that means everything else underneath it is completely left untouched, you cannot
never reach the end of the suffering if you just make it another object, yeah, exactly, yes,
