So this is a sutra of four establishments of mindfulness, but it's not called origination.
It begins very short.
Because I will teach you the origination and the passing way of the four establishments
of mindfulness.
And what figures is the origination of the body with the origination of the uterus,
the origination of the body with the cessation which is the passing way of the body.
So this is the mindfulness of the body.
So basically what I've been going on and on and on and on about, especially when I was
going against the techniques, meditation techniques, by understanding the mindfulness, by understanding the nature of the phenomena you are mindful.
Because there is no understanding that is not found in mindfulness.
So by understanding the arising, the manifestation, the nutrition of the body that simultaneously present with the present body,
you are automatically fulfilling the satikadhan, all the body.
And again, you can only understand that if you enter right here.
So it's just…
Yes, exactly.
So the nutrition of the body, the body being…
Well basically, see like every experience, unmindful experience is the experience of, you know, the self-centred point of view.
Like you are the center for your experience.
So everything is for you, to you, against you, in relation to you and you remain the reference point.
So even when a person thinks about their own body, it's again, it's this body as mine, as in relation to this center that is me.
So this body is here and this body can sick and this body, but still he does not question the validity of that assumed center of that experience,
which is basically the only one of the experience and that experience, the experience of the body, then he's the owner of the body.
But by recognizing that such a fundamental thing, such as body, for example, taking the phenomenon of the body, is actually not rooted towards this center,
but it's actually rooted away from it in those random nutrients.
That is the origination of the body.
So you realize, not just…
So you realize basically that even when you are unmindfully appropriate body, even that is impossible to be a genuine appropriation because the body remains fully penetrable to you as a phenomena.
In penetrable to the ownership by that assumed center, because you have nutrient and the body is a result of it.
When that sees this, the body cannot remain a second longer.
So it's just presence of this, this is.
And you can even think that in a loose sense, you can even think that in a completely kind of the body has been growing old,
they're getting bigger, aging, but not in the course of time, doesn't matter, while the nutrient as a phenomena was present,
as availability, as a consumption, as a food, and things like that.
But again, so which means this body has been maintained through that direct dependence externally by the nutrient, not by you in any shape of form.
We couldn't have done it.
It's a region, a completely different direction from the direction of the center itself.
And another thing is, I think I said that probably a number of times, maybe in recent talks as well,
mindfulness, if done rightly, doesn't come from you, comes from the discernment of things.
Because they arise, they're present, and you use that presence as the presence of mindfulness, basically.
Because that's what mindfulness is, the recognition of presence, whatever, whatever phenomena presence is.
So by recognizing that those things upon which you are mindful are completely independent of you, that mindfulness is done rightly,
and that's how it becomes satipatana.
But discerning the independence of the body, that you have been appropriating, the independence of the nutrient upon which the body directly stands,
that you have also been appropriating and consuming, and so on.
You realize you can't appropriate that, and that's where the mindfulness is rooted in that discernment.
That's why it's satipatana with the discernment of the nutrient.
Not just discernment of the body, because usually there would be this self-centered and then this body, which is still for that self-centered,
and then you might contemplate this in a mind, this in you won't actually learn or apply or take root,
because you're still doing it from that self-assumed center of self.
But seeing that it's rooted, that it's actually coming, that roots are coming from a completely different direction,
direction that you cannot go to, basically, because you will always remain self-centered.
You will step away.
Exactly, step away.
So then it becomes very different.
Then that body can't be as even if you are appropriating it, which means you're not really appropriating it.
And a nutrient being a food, organs.
Yeah, I mean, again, again, you can just take a nutrient as a phenomena.
That which nourishes something else.
That upon which something else is nourished.
Just matter what it is.
If you look at foods, just food, say the possibility of foods there.
You don't see the food in relation to the nutrient of the body.
You don't see the food in relation to being a sancara to the maintenance of the body.
So in that sense, like a person looks at the food, they just look at another thing that they own,
that they possess, that they consume, that they are appropriate.
So it's about seeing the relationship.
And you can find the relationship only through the realism body.
Only through the body that's being manifested right there.
And then while it's still right there and then being manifested.
Then through the presence of the body, you can discern the presence of the nutrient.
And then you'll find out there is that food that you've been finding left and right and up and down away from the body.
To the presence of the body, there is the nutrients of the particular aspects of the body.
It's every nutrient for the body that you're not.
Yeah, sure.
Like say, take any, I don't know, a loaf of bread.
If it's just a loaf of bread as an object of experience,
that's just an interesting thing, that you can appropriate, indulge essentially in,
if you're eating out of pleasure and whatnot.
But if you, through the mindfulness of your body, through the phenomenon of your isn't body,
look for the phenomenon of food, which is that, which sustains the body to be what it is.
And then through that phenomenon of food, so through the body, through the notion of the phenomenon of food,
you can look at that loaf of bread.
So it's still the same loaf of bread, but now it's actually seen in a completely different,
timeless context.
Timeless, there's in simultaneous, represent context.
Even if you're not necessarily eating the bread right there and then.
You change the nature of the nutrient upon which the whole body right here and now,
that is present stands.
Good body can consume itself.
Yes, that's what I said.
You have to look at it as the phenomenon of nutrient.
It doesn't have to worry about the content that it is.
It doesn't have to worry about the ingredients.
Because yeah, if you're ready for it, the body can be eating itself,
and getting nutrients for parts with the body.
But when there's not enough, when there's not any nutrients, there is no body in it.
Exactly.
So there's no presence of nutrition in that presence of that,
that can nourish the body.
The body and nutrients, you can see it's in separable.
Yes, in separable.
Cannot arise apart from each other.
So that's the reason why the body is there.
Because of these things.
No, because of this self-centred assumed sense of ownership.
These things are also included.
Yeah, plural. You can say plural.
It is more correct, plural.
It's a singular nature of these plurality of things.
That's why Sankara is like the termination.
So it's kind of plural.
The organs, only organs.
You get open your chest, right? The heart is still seeing very external.
You see it?
Yeah.
Can you understand what it would be?
Yeah, the very body, the most personal aspects of the body that you regard as yours,
are actually as external as their love for bread, as their jar of milk,
as that cast iron kettlebell, as this piece of stone.
It's that kind of matter. It's the same matter.
It's just the matter that's closest to you.
It's also a matter because of which you get to see and experience the matter,
as in objects of your senses.
So because of that, you just assume a privileged position to it.
But it's as external as all the sense objects you get externally.
The body is as external as them, as they are.
Yeah.
You speak my yesterday about the holiness mentioned before.
The holiness of the body has been hollow.
You seem preventively.
I don't know if it will come inside of feelings or thoughts.
Oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
I think it will actually. It's the same thing.
It's not. It's not.
So the shape of the body is there, the shape of it.
But it doesn't resonate with the sound of you.
It's hollow.
The shell. The shell is there.
But it's not filled anymore with that kind of a life energy of ignorance,
so to speak, which is the energy of appropriation, assumption,
up and down and everything else, the energy of mind.
But yeah, it's still operates.
For as long as the shell doesn't completely break apart.
The next part is with the origination of contact.
There is origination of feeling, dissociation of contact.
There's a passing way of feeling.
So that's it.
The next part is with the origination of contact, there is origination of feeling, dissociation of contact, as a passing way of feeling.
That's a bit more of this trickier.
Well, it's not in a way like, okay, it is more subtle.
But you start with the same principle.
So you start with the principle which has discussed that there is a phenomenon on which the phenomenon of the body directly stands.
It's being nourished by, it's being determined by, it's being found in it.
So in the same sense, feelings, it's inconceivable to have, again, through the presence of feelings, you discern contact.
Not before the feeling or after the feeling or the other side, not through the presence of, so while the feeling is enduring.
That's why I keep saying the beginning of mindfulness is a recognition of the persisting while changing aspect of there is a phenomenon.
So whatever it's a feeling, you have to learn how to let it endure.
Thoughts, a reason experiences, experiences as a whole, you need to basically let it endure.
Allow it to keep changing while remaining the same.
And then you can start seeing things through that sort of maintained persistence of an arisen thing.
So in this case, feelings, if you immediately start like there's a feeling, a feeling arisen.
And then immediately, on that mind of mind, this is not myself, these feelings are just sensations.
It doesn't worry that the calabas and what not, I don't know, you start, whatever, whatever.
And of that basically is found in the mindfulness of that feeling that has arisen. Because mindfulness of the feeling that has arisen means allowing feelings to persist on its own terms.
Whether that's pleasant and pleasant, fearful, dreadful, anxious, does matter.
You need to be able to allow it, because only through that, allowing, you can start this, that's like recognizing things as phenomena, basically, allowing them to arise for what they want to arise, and for however long they want to arise.
So if the feeling is allowed to arise, through that, then you can start discerning contact.
And you could see, what was the nature of the nutrient in relation to the body?
It was something that you could not own. It's something that's always like underneath that body.
So your ownership stops at the threshold of the body. That's where body is mind, and then these things are for the body and what not I, for me, and similar.
But when you recognize that, no, this body that I regard as mind actually directly stands upon other things than me, not me.
It stands upon these things that we can call nutrients.
Then you see, it's impossible for you to own those nutrients in such a manner.
You can't. Your ownership cannot go through the body of the possession of nutrients. They're always going to be step below you.
Now, below your reach, basically. So as far as you reach, they're going to be a step further than that. That's just the nature of it.
So that's how you recognize that you cannot appropriate the body. Why? Because even if no matter what sense of ownership you have,
that body stands upon these nutrients, which if they disappear, the body will disappear, any sense of ownership will disappear.
That's how you stop regarding your sense of ownership as your own as well.
And now, the second paragraph tells us that the context shares the same nature. You can't own it. You can't access it. It's always going to be step below you.
So that's important recognition to sort of discern, because people do and pay that based on the traditional interpretations of contact.
You think you can prevent it. You think you can prevent contact by shutting your eyes, by closing your ears, turning your head away, walking away, you can't.
So that body that's thrown out there in the world, based upon these nutrients, subject to these elements, that body is being contacted constantly for as long as those, for as long as that shower remains.
So you can't stop contact. You can only stop appropriating that which is being contacted. As a result of which, your feelings will be hollowed out.
So it comes like perception. Yeah, but again, you're thinking about a contact now, and you should only through your reason feeling.
So whatever feelings you have now, presence, presently enduring, through that you discern, there is that which is contacted.
And so if you want to pin down contact onto something, you could really just kind of call it a general designation and say, it is that body that's contacted.
So now the body is kind of a nutrient, so to speak, for the feelings to arise, the presence of the body in the world.
Or even more, inside and more accurately, you can say, the presence of the senses in the world is the basis for the feelings to arise.
The sense experience. Yeah.
But sense experience, not in these senses of mind, but those sense organs in that body that stands upon those nutrients.
So that's why you can't just skip to the second about feeling a contact and forget about it first.
It's the same principle that needs to be built up from the start correctly.
So only when you're mindful of the body properly in that sense of nutrient, then the contact can become apparent as that sort of discern through feelings and further and further.
Now then later on, once you sort of fully understood that you become proficient in these four satipatanas, and then you don't necessarily have to keep doing them in the same order, but clearly you could see, there's no satipatana without right contemplation.
No, there is no right contemplation, there wouldn't result in establishment of mindfulness or samadhi.
Yeah, hold on that.
So you like to like, okay, so I have to put in this, then I think body nutrients are now going to step two, step three.
No, you just keep drilling the same principle on different levels.
First, on the obvious level, body nutrients, and the same principle on the level of feeling and contact.
That was the contact that you speak.
So, no, you can really, that's true if you're an arrahan.
If you're a protusion, you say, with feeling that it's contact.
Like if you're approaching to satipatana, first you're going to see feeling through which you can discern a contact.
In the impersonal sort of description of a way, you would say, yeah, contact is a new trend for people.
But from your point of view, which is the only point of view you have, or which is the only point that you have,
you have feeling through which, in the same sense, you have body through which you discern nutrients.
And then you stop, basically, placing emphasis on the side of body as my body, in relation to me.
On the side of feeling, there's my feelings in relation to me.
But you recognize the emphasis is against your will, against your control.
You can't even conceive, to change that.
It's actually rooted in some kind, in the dominations, not in you.
And that's how you stop regarding things as yours, not because you want it.
But because you realize it's impossible to not, not do it.
So you, they are, they cannot be yours, even if you want to.
So you just have to recognize the thoroughly.
So you start with the body through which you discern simultaneous presence of random nutrients.
They are not the body.
You start with the feelings through which you discern, they has been contact.
And it's still there in dealing, because these feelings are in dealing.
So you always want to ask why instead of feeling, why is that?
Well, see, that's the same body.
Yeah, well, yeah.
But see, you would ask that because for you, contact seems, well, it's still regarded as optional.
So then you ask why is it then?
The fact that you think your question can pertain to the nature of contact means you think you can put it in question.
But that's already a form of accessing it.
And only it, and relating to it.
You can put your feelings in question.
And if you look why they are there, you would see, because it has been contacted.
Or contact has a reason.
Don't think of contact as that kind of, I don't know, whatever they describe it, in commentaries or like a medical, you know, description of it either.
Basically think of contact as a manifestation of pressure.
Not perception.
Well, you can say it, but I don't think you have to shed any more light, because perception already has lots of assumed motions attached to it.
Think of it as pressure. So you can have a very agreeable pressure, which is then felt pleasantly.
And you could again, the reason why I say pressure is because pressure remains.
For as long as there is pressure being felt, you know, it's being pressured, it's being touched.
It's being felt in a felt context.
It's being felt, or rather feeling is inseparable from contact.
Even honestly, realize all this, and you're feeling the contact.
But because there is that in the world, that can be pressured.
That can be touched. That can be contacted. That is feeling simultaneously present right there in your mind.
But there is no linear connection that you can observe.
In the same sense, there is no linear connection between uterine and the food, because if it were, you were not seeing it as a simultaneously timelessly present principle of nutrient and that which is being determined by the nutrient.
Exactly. So if you start like a contact, a hair, and then goes this, and sensations, and then this is the feeling, that's all out there.
None of that is actually what you are feeling, and the pressure that's underneath that feeling.
Because take up any feeling. Again, you have to start through feeling, pleasurable feeling.
So there is a, there is a agreeable pressure to found through that pleasurable feeling.
Painful feeling can persist for days, which means for the whole time, the disagreeable pressure persists.
The disagreeable contact has a reason. The disagreeable contact is being manifested, or other is manifested.
The disagreeable contact is persisting while it's changing.
The disagreeable contact is enduring. The pressure is enduring.
So by seeing that pressure and feeling are two different things, but completely inseparable, then you will stop regarding feeling as yours, and then pressure on body.
I want to say it's the same thing, I know it's two different things, but it's the same thing.
Well, it's not the same thing. It is two different things, that are simultaneously present.
Do you get that?
Yeah, you can say that, they are conjuring, there's the one in the same, in regard to the perception, that's kind of one of them.
Well, they're not the same. But you cannot think them about either. So one is found through the other, through the other.
So think of feeling, you're already implying pressure within the feeling.
Just what I think of feeling, feel the feeling, you're already, there is already pressure. We did that feeling while, that's important being, while, not after or before, but while it is being felt.
So feeling is inseparable from the pressure.
And same.
Pleasurable, very agreeable. Get light for feelings.
Yeah, it's a very agreeable pressure.
Neutral. Neutral feeling again, yeah. Well, it's basically neutral pressure. Neither agreeable, nor disagreeable pressure.
And that's what contact is, or rather you'd be much better of thinking of contact in those terms.
And you don't need to designate it any more accurately. It's quite sufficient, actually, because the whole purpose of it is to see that simultaneous dependence, simultaneous relationship of this is being nurtured, simultaneously, while it is present, by contact.
And that's how you can own it. It's not rooted in you.
So, yeah, passing contact is worth feeling.
So by discerning contact, through the feeling, you automatically stop appropriating feeling.
That's what I really meant when he said, in order to approve the thing that's been taken as yourself, you have to see it as directly depending upon that, which is not at the same time taken as the self.
Because if you look at low for bread, or if you look at the raw pressure or contact separately, yeah, you'll take that as yourself. You'll appropriate that.
But if you discern that through the feeling that is at the time then taken as a self by default, then that won't be able to be taken as a self.
Yet you see it as that, because of which this, that you did it take as yourself depends upon. Then it will as well, then I myself am not my own. Thus that is not self.
So, and you're saying yesterday, it's hardiness. Yeah, so when the feeling is not yours anymore, basically that, that trail of that pressure that has been exhibited on you remains that that, you know, the imprint, so to speak, can persist for a while.
But now it's been, well, drained out, so to speak. It's not charged anymore. There is no charge to it, because it's not yours.
So then it's just a different extent of different amount of hollowing that the pressure has exerted.
So in that sense, the point is, it's not just like a, I don't know, it's sort of like, it's not basically completely unaware, unrecognizing of any feeling enemy. He's not a robot.
So the significance that the pressure of a certain experience is still very much there to the extent that he wants to go. That's why Arvant is not afraid of death.
He cannot even conceive the fear of death. That doesn't mean because he's not aware what death is on the contrary.
So he's actually the only being that is, that is capable of fully comprehending and grasping the imprint, the pressure of the experience of death, and even that cannot overtake him anymore.
So in the sense that other feelings, while he's still alive, other pressure that's being exerted, different significances, somebody comes instead of killing all the monks around him and stuff, he's not like, oh, what is happening?
He knows exactly what's going on and he feels that amount of hollowing towards him, that used to be the feeling, that used to be that pressure exerted on him, but now he cannot engage on that level.
So he's completely beyond it, but he still recognizes the degree of that hollowing that used to be felt.
That's why it's empty, little empty big empty, but it doesn't matter, it's empty, that's the point.
So little feelings are little empty, big feelings are really empty.
The point is the nature of that emptiness, that hollowing, that draining away, disowning, dispatching, all of that is just completely extinguishing.
So yeah, like a hollow stump, as the Buddha would describe it.
The position of Pasa as touching or pressure as opposed to contact always goes any more if you have to.
Who was just saving in there? Somebody who? You just did.
Yeah, but they're not in a sense, they're in a certain sense, they are not touching, so to say.
Yeah, exactly, there is that pressure or hollowing because he's not pressured anymore.
The point is when people think contact, they think of something that has happened, that is done, but that's not so.
So if the pressure descend the contact through the feeling, they're right here happening now, which means contact is right there for that whole time and during, through it, through the feeling.
So if there is no that pressure, there wouldn't be any feelings.
And you realize that which is being pressured, it's the level of those nutrients and the level of that body that's not in your control.
Whereas it's just, you can't even imagine it. Yet you know it's there because why? Because you feel. And you discern it through those feelings that are being felt.
That's where you start the body seeing that body currently, just getting the grip, the notion of the principle. And then you can start what's beyond this. Sorry? You might get larger, or what if I looked in there.
Well, it becomes more discerning of the principle, which means that it's a universal principle, that it's present in everything that is arising. That's why it's a universal principle.
And then you don't have to keep repeating. You just start seeing it because, yeah, it's arising thus it's but taking to this nature of the same principle that you have understood.
Yeah, and even now, like, there was never like a special contemplation within feeling and the contemplation, and I think I might have read that too, but I don't even remember it. But the point is, you look at the principle and you see exactly what's there. And how it has to be.
And more skilled people would maybe describe it in even a greater detail, more accurately. But that's irrelevant. What's important is to see the principle, because that's what's freezing from suffering.
Fully developing that is how you become another.
With the origination of name and form, there is the origination of mind, the cessation of name and form. Now let's get in your modifying. But no matter how refined it gets, it doesn't mean it's getting more intricate or more complex.
It is becoming more subtle within the same principle or principle that was pertaining to the first thing that you read.
And the second thing, and the third thing, and then the fourth thing that you read.
So what is then the next thing that people regard as mind? The body, the feelings, and the next thing would be, oh, my mind.
This ambiguous presence of this mental energy, or not, I will not call it. That's what mind, basically. The mental. It's the closest to it.
It's closer, more closer than your feelings, and it's more closer than your body. So how you disown that? Well, by letting it endure, by seeing either eyes,
and by through its presence, discerning that upon which the mind has to be standing, which is not you.
And that's name and form. That is the or. Anything that can possibly manifest itself.
So you can say the manifestation. And that's something you cannot prevent. In the same sense, the pressure is being exerted because of which you feel something you cannot prevent.
In the same sense, the body, depending on the nutrients that are nourishing the body somehow, it's something you cannot prevent.
You cannot be eating nutrients, and providing nutrients, and saying, may these nutrients not nourish the body, no.
They're nutrients because they nourish, because the body directly stands upon it.
So it's the same principle, just a course, a course, a form of it. But for the mind, which is out there, it's again the same.
Like the mind would be inconceivable without the natural manifestation upon which it stands, without name and form.
Without that body, that form, and that mental capacity in regard to it, your mind would not be there.
So then you recognize that that body and the mental capacity in regard to it, I, the consciousness, that's not yours.
Because they've discovered it through that determination, that is the determination of the mind.
Which means the domain of those things are inaccessible to you, the domain of now root God.
The domain of Pasa is inaccessible to you.
And so you cannot not experience the pressure, what you can do is semantic internally.
And fourth one is the origination of the attention, that is the origination of phenomena.
What's even such a thing that you mind, the particular movements of your mind, the level of jumps, the level of sort of pokes, the directions, that's what attention is.
But again, what does the attention depend on?
Just, well actually so, what I said for the third, it's actually more accurately said for the fourth, the natural manifestation.
So you can take an avarupa, what does an avarupa has as its nature, it's to manifest itself.
So if you take the natural manifestation, what is corresponding, attention.
Because of that you can jump at it, because of that you can direct a bolted.
So when there is a tending to something, when the attention is present, then what you have, through what you can discern through that attention is, the thing has a reason.
So if you can attend it, it's because it was given beforehand as an option to be attended to.
But then you recognize, so me, moving my attention, it's completely secondary.
That's only possible, because this thing has a reason beforehand, because of which I am attending to it right now.
And that arising is something you are not saying.
Thus, your attention, then, cannot be yours, because your attention cannot not depend on this random arising of things.
It's just inconceivable. What is there to attend there? How can you even think of attention?
So that's even something. But again, you could just take the first one, the first one.
That's what the Buddha said, oh, he just remains mindful of this body there, to the extent necessary for the final knowledge.
So this is just for different, basically different capacities, different people would have.
For some people, pondering on the principle between attention and the manifestation that's manifested through the attention,
because of which attention is there in the first place, is quite a palpable thing to contemplate on, to keep in their mind.
But for some people, it wouldn't be.
So that's why he laid out the principle in all four gradually increasing in subtlety descriptions of the same principle.
Why? Because if he only done it in terms of the body, then those people who were able to think more subtle things would see,
in the mind you would figure it out himself, that it's the same principle, but the Buddha being the Buddha-gottam being the one who's foremost in teaching the Dharma would have expanded in every possible subtle way.
Like actually, now he comes to my mind, that other Sutta Indigene kaya, the Buddha with Pasi, previous Buddha,
the Buddha gives a story of him, whereby he, as a bodhisatta, descend the principle of Patitsam Bhada, before he became Buddha.
And then, and then he starts describing it, a Viji Pachasankara, and so on, and then he comes to,
number upa determines the Vinyana, and then Vinyana determines another Upa.
And that's where his bodhisatta ended. He did not take it further into a Viji and everything else, and says,
when he kind of finished sort of clarifying that formulation, then he remained mindful of the rising and falling of the manifestation of the five aggregates,
on the experience as a whole, for a period of time until his mind was fully purified, and he became some of some Buddha.
So you could see that that some of some Buddha was not as detailed, as prolific, as the Buddha in terms of defining the principle to all its possible subtleties,
but the Buddha was, but it's still the same principle.
So in other words, I'm saying, take up just the first paragraph that you read, and perfect that principle,
develop it, like take it as far as you can, and it will result in the, your attention being freed from assumption in regard to manifestation.
It's a blanket, basically, again. You have a particular disease, a particular bacteria attacking you, and you start giving a broad spectrum, antibiotic,
that it's not so strong, so you have to do it longer, but eventually you will wipe out all the negative, all the harmful bacteria.
Or if you're very accurate, if you have such capacity, you only get a very specific antibiotic, they will very specifically kill only the harmful bacteria.
But most people, it's not that black and white, so you kind of start with broad, then you might sort of narrow it down with more accurate treatment, so to speak.
But not necessarily, if you don't have access to it, just stick to the broad one, do it as long as necessary, and it will destroy everything else.
There was supposed to be destroyed. You might sort of make you suffer a bit longer in terms of patient enduring, and determination, and restraint, and so on, but that's not a big deal.
Because it will cure you completely.
