But based on how I did yesterday, this session, I was thinking that the paper we were talking
about can it be understood as the field on which the particular manifest?
Yes and no.
Yes in a sense that, yeah, it is a particular arise on the basis of that more general or more
peripheral. That's really the sense basis for example I refer to as can be translated as
fields with the same, in the same sense actually because the sense objects that arise on
the particular level, they arise on the basis of the field of the eye.
But the problem is, that's why it's yes, but it can be answered no if you give that field
some sort of priority over the particular, because that field is a negative phenomenon.
It's defined by the things that arise particularly.
So you can discern that there is a field because the eye objects are present,
because the particular things have a reason, the peripheral is generated because of that.
It's defined because of that. So it's not independent of the particular.
So I mean the question you asked is valid, but sometimes it can be asked in a sense of which is first,
which is more important, which is greater and in that sense I have to be able to answer
because then people just think, okay so there is this field and then things arise upon the field
but if you think like that, you're taking that field to be the particular,
which means something else is then very thorough in regard to that thought of that very defined field.
So it's one thing to understand it, the level of your mind sort of thinking intellectually
and it's important to clarify as much as you can.
But as I said, if you want to recognize it as the actual phenomena that fill these,
there is always generated on the basis of the current particular.
That's how you start, like you just mindfulness or present situation of the body and so on
and then based on that, this is already there, so you just need to discern it
and then recognize that which you have intellectually grasped beforehand.
Because now you have sort of the information and the data to sort of identify things as they are in this certain manner.
So in that sense, in that sense, yes, things arise on the basis of the field
but in return that field is defined by the things that arise on the basis of it.
So what you have, number of the term is Vinyana,
it as much as Vinyana, the term is number of two sticks holding each other.
One is not more than the other and one cannot even be conceived
with the other being simultaneously present.
And that's how, by full understanding that there is absolutely no room
for the sense of self or the appropriation to remain there
because it becomes completely redundant.
The whole picture, these two sticks, they don't need any master operator.
Basically, they support each other for as long as the five aggregates are present,
things will be arising and manifesting and defining itself, defining everything.
And everything else will continue operating, so to speak.
The intention and the volition, all that would stay,
but what wouldn't stay is the owner of it, because there's no room for the owner.
The owner is part of the stick, so what can you own?
Can you own the left stick?
If it's being supported by the right one, you can't.
You realize, well, I think I own it.
If the right stick goes, the left one cannot stay.
Can you own the right stick?
If it's being held by the left one.
And you can't hold them both at the same time,
because that will imply you stepping outside of your experience
and then taking up the hold of its foundations, which you can't do there.
So that's the practice, basically.
That's the big personal in that sense. It's that repetition of that contemplation
of this mutual dependence on these things whereby,
by fully discerning that, you automatically squeeze out any sense of appropriation itself,
because it's just inconceivable to be there at the same time.
It becomes redundant, completely.
So, if you use the approach of Salayatina, the sense basis, yes,
they're the negative, they're the base, they're the field.
And I think the old translations of Nyanimalitera,
the first was, well, he was so then experimenting with it at some point,
it was the field, the field.
I think the video is as well referring to it as such.
Because from yesterday, when I was meditating,
I actually realized that it seems that all the Salayatanas are all the time operating
and your attention just pick up one small piece,
so you have one moment from that whole inconceivable amount of possibilities
and you actually have no idea what will come in the next moment.
Or you have a very limited idea.
And that limit is given to you by the thing beforehand.
So, in that sense, you're not in a control, even of that idea.
So, you just come right after votes.
So, you think it's all going to be set up?
Yeah. And you just come on the scene.
And it is the six sense basis,
these six fields of possibilities, the six negative, six peripherals,
if that's the approach you take,
yeah, they are simultaneously present there all the time.
And your attention, obviously, lies on the basis of one particular moment.
We die, thought, whatever takes your fancy or presses you the hardest.
Yes.
And can you explain what keeps the narrative?
Well, the narrative, yes, organising.
Yes, exactly. The narrative is kept by the mind,
because the five senses meet in the mind.
So, the mind does, for its own object,
has the overview of the five senses.
That's how they're intelligible.
Now, you have a protugener has an extra layer of narrative,
which is his act of other.
And he senses self.
That adds a whole, another assumed dimension of another point of view
that's external to all of this.
Like, the mind, that's just other hand as well.
Like, he has a narrative, he has a context.
He can still operate and talk, and discern, and choose, and prefer,
because the mind is where the senses meet.
Obviously, the mind cannot be overwhelmed by the senses anymore.
So, nothing that he chooses or prefers would be based on anything unwholesome.
But for protugener, he has assumed another completely gratuitous dimension of
his sense of self being independent of both that mind and all those senses.
It's just completely outside.
It's holding both of the sticks, because that's the idea of the self.
That's the notion of self.
That's the meaning of it, the mastery, you are in charge.
So, you can see how much more complex than the narrative becomes,
and much more unpredictable as well.
And that's exactly why having the sense of self results in suffering.
Because you're trying your sort of acting as if you are the center of experience,
yet at every single experience you have, that is being undermined through the very experience.
So, that's why if a protugener would stop engaging in the world,
stop engaging in the desires, practicing the strength,
going to close himself in a little cell, in a little room,
first it would be the boredom they would come.
And then it would be a shared dread of fear.
And many people would lose their minds.
If there is nothing, nothing, taking away that fear.
Why? Because they remain holding.
They cannot not hold to their sense of self, to their assumed external entity, really.
That it's just being now crushed from every possible conceivable direction.
And he recognizes the prospect of it, he feels it.
That's why it's so terrifying.
That's why when the protugener would talk to the Buddha sometimes,
and he would tell what he teaches,
they would understand what he, they would understand the dispression,
the point of view of Nibbana,
like abandoning it all before it's taken away.
But they wouldn't let go of the sense of self.
So then that understanding would completely make them go mad.
They would fall on the ground over their hair, be their breast,
basically full on panic attack and dread.
Because they don't let go of the self.
Yet they understood clearly that all these things,
they've come to an end that's our phones.
Yet if the self owns means self will be owning its ending as well.
The ending of those things, but it can't.
So you realize the self will be destroyed.
And then they would lament and say what that will destroy us.
That will kill us.
There will be nothing left.
Because in their mind it's the self,
that sort of governs all these things.
It seems that this approach can relate this thing, this thing.
And this thing is that notion of self,
because if you realize how broad,
and you think that it's not just your particular experience,
but there is that whole thing is around,
which you can't control.
Probably it's a bad word.
I know what you mean, but it probably is equal.
It will extinguish that dimension
that is being gratuitously maintained and generated
as an external dimension to the whole experience,
and the self abides and lives as the master, as the God.
Once you start noticing that that dimension,
it's already peripheral,
that has peripheral to it,
you realize there is no outside to you.
Because when you think outside,
that's the experience inside.
So even your thoughts of external
are experienced right here right now in turn of.
Which means you can't step outside of your experience.
And that's not hard to grasp on the intellectual.
It kind of makes sense.
But drilling it long enough until the mind stops
sort of wavering and going out of it,
even with those kind of careless lazy thinking assumptions,
that will take time.
But the more you do it,
the more sort of your kind of,
well, as I said, you're sort of fading away
that notion of external dimension.
Because no matter what external dimension you're thinking,
presently right now, mindfully,
you realize that's already surrounded by its own peripheral,
which means it cannot be the ultimate external,
which means it cannot be the ultimate owner,
the ultimate self, the ultimate God, the ultimate anyway.
It's all a reason on the basis of the particular experience.
And then it was, yeah, that was the whole point.
It was just that little kind of careless way
of attending to things assuming the external
to yourself, to your experience,
to others, doesn't matter.
There was enough, there was enough for his whole mess
of some sort, nothing else.
That's why ignorance and wrong views
the most plain word you think, nothing else.
And also, that's why careless attention
is in the beginning of the whole.
And that's why somebody just sort of stops gradually,
fades away, the assuming of that external dimension.
He basically stops assuming the art of other.
That is actually what art of other is.
So, he becomes free from the factor of the self-review.
So, isn't so that,
Ionisomanasitara is actually in regards
to these things we are talking about.
Yes, Ionisomanasitara, Ionisom is womb.
So, basically, the root, the beginning.
So, you could see, if the normal attention
is attention, it's usually completely focused upon the object.
And even if it steps away from the object into more general picture,
it makes that an object.
So, always, the measure for ordinary Ionisomanasitara
is the object, that's it.
It doesn't see anything simultaneously present
that's peripheral to that attended object.
But if it starts to train itself
to start noticing other things while
it is still attending the present object,
whatever object is, whatever the sense
there might have been, sort of, most dominant.
If it starts noticing those particular
without making them into a new object,
you keep your old attention, so to speak, on the object.
And simultaneously, while that is present,
you start noticing other things that they are simultaneously present
but not the object.
So, basically, you start trying to mind
to discern other things different from that
which you are used to discerning, which is only an object.
So, it's the same, through the same attention,
you start looking at the origins of that object.
What's behind it?
What's around it?
What's higher than it?
The nature or the structure?
Yeah, so you start looking at the structure of it.
You start looking at the womb from which it all originated.
So, that's why it's young.
It's a monasticity.
It's a proper attention.
It's not like people often
to state proper attention improperly
or rather lazily and carelessly,
whereby it just means like,
oh, it's a wholesome attention.
It's just when you attend good.
And you think, no, it's much more precise than that.
That's why it's such a fundamental aspect.
It's like one of the factors for the right view.
Equal important as the word of the Buddha.
So, you can have all the words of the Buddha
and all the Buddhas.
If you have no proper attention,
none of that will make sense or take root.
Yeah.
So, basically, discerning the structure
through their reason thing,
without sort of making it into a new thing,
because then the structure is somewhere else.
Yes.
So, basically, that's how you train your attention
to become proper attention.
So, it attends to whatever attend,
but it sees beyond it.
Yes.
So, it doesn't get locked on to just the face value
of the reason thing.
Yes.
Yes.
I still feel that there is actually a danger
that instead of, like, seeing the structure,
you just set back and you want the broader...
Well, it has to start like that.
Yeah.
It has to start like that.
But as long as you know that you will be supposed
to be seeing the peripheral in regard to whatever,
it's currently present.
So, yes.
You set back, you broaden the experience,
but then that becomes particular.
Isn't it?
But then through that,
you keep this turning further.
But if there is no entry,
it's infinite, in that sense.
You can keep doing that as much as you like.
And the whole point of doing it is to start
discerning that principle,
field, and the thing that isn't upon the field,
that defines field in its return.
Yes.
So, that's why, in some sense,
you don't necessarily have to have,
kind of, greatly developed,
mind to discerne the principle of,
but it's some other of that interdependence.
You don't need to,
because you can discerne the principle
upon very basic things,
but you discerne the same principle.
Yes.
There is this.
There is this.
Yes.
With this, this is.
Yes.
This is present, this is present, that's it.
So, when there is a field,
for things to be sort of arisen upon,
things arise upon it,
which in return define that field
as that which they are not at the time,
they are arisen upon it.
So, it's fully mutually determining each other,
and you realize that's how everything works, in that sense.
So, yes, in a way,
but it isn't quite explaining how everything works.
In a very direct,
insightful manner,
where if you understand it,
you automatically stop
regarding things as you are.
You're automatically free from yourself.
So, you're basically,
if you fully develop it,
you become an arunt.
But it doesn't explain it in a sense
of telling you what's happening,
and it provides us an explanation.
It kind of requires time,
and it's sort of linear
and successful things,
and when this changes,
and this goes ahead,
as I say, oh, yeah,
they really, that's right there,
they really make sense of something like that.
It's much more precise than that.
So, it's not necessarily wrong.
I mean, it is actually.
It is wrong in a sense that,
but this one,
but it should be taken as a precise thing,
because then people will take it seriously,
and then try to discern this very thing.
But it's very, very hard to discern,
as you can see for yourself.
Now, you're starting to get the idea,
what it refers to,
but actually, discerning it,
and then discerning this relationship,
is just the same principle,
because every participant starts
with this, this is,
and then we watch what is,
and then it carries on
into 12 factors,
or 16 factors,
or 8 factors,
depending on how the book describes it,
on different occasions.
But it's the same principle
that's being described.
So, you could see,
what kind of understanding
would be required to see that principle
in all those intricate ways
of relating to each other,
as the book that would have described,
but it's not part of the birth
and everything else,
as phenomena.
But the good news is,
you don't have to.
All you have to do is see the principle,
which is basically nothing else,
and saying,
oh, yes, whatever has a reason,
for that reason,
it's impermanent.
I understand, basically,
if you really see the principle,
then do the village
or extinguish that notion of art?
Yes.
That's why it was said,
in the suitors,
Sariputra said,
I think,
one who sees the,
Sariputra said,
one who sees Dhamma,
sees Patit Sampada.
One who sees Patit Sampada,
sees the Dhamma here.
Yes.
And you realize,
also,
it must be
as important,
as any other,
kind of directly relevant aspect of the Dhamma.
But the problem is,
there's so much,
obviously, wrong notions,
explanations, views,
based upon Patit Sampada today.
So,
it's probably embedded
if people don't bother with it,
in that sense,
try to figure it out,
because it's,
because there's so much out,
it's quite likely
they'll be pulled to one wrong side
or the other,
and end up doing it wrongly.
It's not,
it's not necessarily
crucial,
or the deal breaker,
if person still remains authentic,
and knows why they're practicing
and what,
what's supposed to sort of
be uprooted
with the understanding,
they'll figure it out eventually.
But,
it's really not not necessary.
Just understand the principle.
Don't worry about it.
12 or 8 or 16,
whichever way they will describe it,
you don't worry about it.
Just understand the two sticks supporting each other.
Just understand,
peripheral and actual,
actual peripheral.
Yes.
Because fully understanding it
will leave no room
for the sense of self to be assumed at.
And that's all.
The self was never there,
as you can see,
yet,
by not knowing that he's there,
so the presence
of not knowledge,
of non-knowledge,
that self cannot be there,
the presence of that phenomena,
places the self there
to the extent of that phenomena.
So if you had not knowledge,
that self cannot be there,
was great,
quite sort of spread around your experience,
yourself,
is to the same extent spread about.
So you're fully responsible for it.
Then consequently,
fully understood,
fully removing the non-knowledge,
replacing with knowledge,
that self cannot be anywhere there,
the self is not anywhere there.
And that's why there is the element of nibbana
in Putujana's experience.
It's nothing other than say
there's a possibility of him
to achieve nibbana,
to free himself from himself.
And then it's possible
because the structure
can never be actually penetrated
or affected by the self.
If it were,
then means the self
would have some input.
And it would be.
It would be a sort of a master.
But it's not.
But until you know that,
then it is.
Yes.
That's why you said,
Upadana is not a five aggregates.
Not all of them,
not even one of them,
not even bits of them,
nothing.
But there is no Upadana without them.
So it's in regard to them.
In the same self,
in the same sense,
the self is in regard to the experience as a whole.
But it's not actually there,
which is why for Putujana,
who doesn't question itself,
he assumes it elsewhere.
I external to the whole thing.
Once you take that away,
then you realize,
as well,
it cannot be elsewhere.
So you can't hide there.
Certainly you can't fit in here.
Then it fades.
You left it no choice.
So that's why you kind of indirectly,
you keep shutting down
the escape routes
for the assumption of the self.
You can't directly stop assuming.
That's when an environment
sees it,
the origin needs to be unscrewed.
You can't just knock it out as a peg.
Knock it out as a peg.
