I'm going to discuss the right attention, you only saw Manisikara, the Buddha praises
this quality many, many times. It's essential in the practice. Yeah, it's one of the prerequisites
for the right view as well, one out of two. And he says, because I do not see even a single
thing that so causes unarisen wholesome qualities to arise and unholesome qualities to decline
as right attention for one who attends carefully, unarisen wholesome qualities arise and
arisen unholesome qualities. He says, one who attends properly. So, one who attends
not careful, because people who think all they need to do is be careful and they'll
see the truth. Now, you actually need to know where you're supposed to attend, thus
attend properly. Rightly. Rightly, exactly. Attendly, rightly. And there are these two conditions
for arising of right view, the utterance of another and proper attention. These are the
two conditions. And we need to use these speaks about the pathages, depends on origination.
He uses that proper attention, explained it to that. Now, I'll just give one example.
This can be found in the connected discourses, some Utanika. Because before my enlightenment,
while I was still a Bodhisatta, not yet fully enlightened, it occurred to me. Alas,
this world has fallen into trouble in that it is born, ages and dies. It passes away
and is reborn. Yet it does not understand the escape from the suffering, headed by aging
in death. When now, will an escape be discerned from the suffering, headed by aging in death?
Then because it occurred to me, when what exists, does aging in death come to be? By what
is aging in death, determined? Then because, to proper attention, they took place in me
a breakthrough by wisdom. When there is birth, aging in death comes to be. Aging in death
has birth as its determination. So, through proper attention, it took place in me a breakthrough
by wisdom. So, as pretty much every other sutra, people can either read it, kind of
superficially, so to speak, and then read that passage as, okay, so he, the Buddha properly,
you know, he was careful attending, he was really thinking about it, and then he figured
it out. Because, yeah, it can read like that. But if you actually take every sutra to be
a phenomenological description of the nature of experience, nature of things, thus, if
I understood, a person would be at least a sotapana, if not more. Well, in that case, you
would approach that quite differently. So, if he says, so if he was the Yonisamanaseka
there, which he did, if he used the same term, that proper attention or the right attention
means, proper attention is that, which reveals the timeless principle of the teaching father.
And it reveals the principle of dependent origination, the principle, that basically has its two
factors that are simultaneously present, because it says, with what as condition has this,
well, with what as condition is aging in death being manifest. Because, you know, you
are aging and dying simply by being alive. So, what is the simultaneously present condition
for that state? It's the fact that you are manifested in this human existence. That's
what birth is. Birth is not coming out of womb. Birth is manifesting. Manifestation of
the father aggregates the ure appropriating. And that starts when the Buddha, the Buddha
said himself, that starts when an embryo is conceived. It's already, one is already manifested
into this human realm. So, what we take to be birth coming out of womb in a hospital
is just like one of the stages, one of the aspects of that manifestation. But there wouldn't
be coming out of womb if there was no embryo conceived in the first place. So, the birth
takes place when the five aggregates manifest, when the five aggregates a bound, sorry, when
the one to be bound is present and mother and father come together and mother is in season.
And then embryo is conceived. Embryo, there is the five aggregates. And that's what birth
is. And that embryo, when it's conceived simultaneously with its conception or rather
simultaneously with its manifestation, another thing that manifests simultaneously to that
is aging in death. Because growing of the embryo, it's already aging. It's already dying
because it's manifested. So, it's a simultaneous presence of manifestation aging in death. So,
that is the important thing to understand. With dependent origination, it's not the explanation
of causality because every dependent origination description starts with this, this is. So,
with two aspects, one, the determine is the other, but both are present. Simultaneous
is the present. That's what means it doesn't involve time. It's a carlica. It's timeless.
It doesn't involve time. Things that don't involve time are the ones that, like, in their
relationship, are the ones that are simultaneously present to the same extent. And that's what
proper attention shows you. With this, this is. So, that's why, if somebody has a right
view, all they need to do is practice proper attention because all they need to do is just
bring back to the mind that Simultaneous Principle of dependent origination. And they will bring
all the lust to fade. All aversion to fade. All ignorance to fade. Because there's whatever
he attends to. And he attends rightly when they fall. Yeah, whatever he attends to, he
attends rightly. He attends properly. He attends according to its nature. And that nature
is, it is determined. It is impermanent. With this, this is. I'll read the, my, my, my
Jimmy Kaya. Number two, all the tanks. Because this goes into using proper attention. Sure.
So this is the Sabah. Sabah, Sabah, Sabah, Sutta, all the tanks. Because I shall teach
you a discourse on the restraint of all the tanks. Listen and take closely to what I
shall. Say, yes, venable servant, because you play it. The best of unsaid this. Because
I say that the destruction of the tanks is for one who knows and sees. Not for one who
does not know and see. Means it's first, at least sort of one for this. Who knows and
sees what? Proper attention and unproperate attention. Exactly. The one attends properly.
Unarisen tanks, one one attends unproperly, improperly, improperly. Unarisen tanks arise
and arisen tanks increase. When one attends properly, unarisen tanks do not arise and arisen
tanks are abandoned. The tanks are three central, central desire being in English. Because
there are tanks that should be abandoned by seeing. There are tanks that should be abandoned
by restraining, by using, by enduring, by avoiding, by removing and by developing. So
it goes into each of those. Tains to be abandoned by seeing. What tanks should be abandoned
by seeing? Here because an untought ordinary person who has no regard for noble ones and
is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dharma, who has no regard for true man and is unskilled
and undisciplined in their Dharma, does not understand what things are fit for attention
and what things are unfit for attention. Since that is so, he attends to those things
unfit for attention and he does not attend to those things fit for attention. What other
things unfit for attention that he attends to, they are things such that when he attends
there, the unarisened taint of central desire arises, the taint of being arises and the taint
of ignorance arises. These are the things unfit for attention that he attends to. And
the opposite, when he knows what he is doing, but the untought ordinary person also attends
in this improper way. He thinks himself, was I in the past? Was I not in the past? Was
I in the past? How was I in the past? See, that is the crucial difference. Improper
attention is the attention that carries the sense of self, carries the notion of I in.
Proper attention is the attention that leaves no room for the sense of self. If you properly
attend, if you say, with this, this is, there is no room for the owner of either this
or this, or this or that, or in between the two. There is just no room for it. It is with
the rising of this, this also arises. Or rather with this, when this is present, this is
present too. So basically, fundamentally, you can take your experience as a whole and
you can see that it is utterly, completely determined by the presence of life. You can
say that. You are alive, thus, whatever you experience is because you are still alive.
Whatever you are experiencing, no matter how it differs particularly, the nature of experience
is there because life is still present. So you can, you can then just reflect further and
see, okay, well, are you in control of that life? Are you in control of the beating heart?
Are you in control of functional brain? Are you in control of preventing accidents
from happening? You are not. Thus, this life that is present rests upon the foundations
that are utterly inconceivable, inaccessible to you. And when you fully understand that,
then you cannot possibly regard it as yours. So that is what proper attention penetrates.
It descends that there are foundations that undermine you that you cannot access. So basically,
it restores the right order of things. Whereby, with this, this is. That is the right order.
For protrusion, it is with me, my experience is. I am thus things are for me, things are mine.
It is actually other way around. So that is exactly why it says, like somebody who is a
protrusion, an uninstructed world, who doesn't know how to attend to things properly. That
is why he ends up wandering these things. Because in the past, was I not? Was I not?
Will I be in the future? How I will be. How I will be. All of that revolves around the fact
that he completely taken for granted that he is. So now, now he is just wondering, how
easy was he all the time? But he never questions that, hold on, even the question of, what
am I, who am I, when I was, how I was? That all revolves around the present notion of
control. Which means he is not properly attending to the nature of experience, and he doesn't
see it as impermanent. And seeing it as impermanent means seeing it as not in your control.
I mean, have doubts arising? Yes, of course. Because basically, he makes himself viable to
add doubt. He doesn't recognize that any of those questions, no matter what the particular
thing that they might be asking is, all those questions in the nature revolve around the
notion of sense of self. And that's all the mistake. Thus he'll then just doubt, because
none of the answers can be satisfied. Was I, yes it was, yes, but was I always? Well, I
don't know. Will I be? Well, I don't know that either. Am I now? Am I not now? How am I
now? All those, oh, it's just just permutations of the same assumption. But he goes beyond
doubt. He attends rightly. He goes beyond doubt if he basically, well, if he's basically
not concerned with those questions, because they're rooted in a mistake in assumptions.
So if he attends rightly, he addresses the mistaken assumptions of sense of control, permanence
and I am. By dissolving that, everything that was depending upon it, namely those questions,
cannot remain. So he doesn't answer the questions. So the one who basically makes them cease. He's
understanding makes all the questions cease. He goes beyond doubt. This is, after that, a
well-thought, noble disciple, who has regard for noble ones and he's skilled and disciplined
in their dhamma, who has regard for true men and he's skilled and disciplined in their dhamma,
understands what things are for attention and what things are unfit for attention. Since
that is so, he does not attend to think those things unfit for attention and he attends
those things unfit for attention. And this is the way he attends. This is suffering. He
attends properly. This is the origin of suffering. He attends properly. This is the cessation
of suffering. This is the way leading to the cessation of suffering. When he attends properly
in this way, three fetters are abandoning him. The personality of you, doubt, and adherence
to rules and observances. These are called the tains that she would abandon thusly. This
is interesting because he's saying he's a noble disciple who attends in this way properly,
the four noble truths, but then when he does this, he reaches the fruit of sort of life.
Yeah, because in that other sort that there is a distinction before a person becomes
sort upon, he gets a pain to the right view. So, Dhammanusari, Sadhanusari. So, he's
not sort upon a yet, but his view is basically now along the right lines, which means he knows
what the proper attention is. So, as that very passage says, when he practices it, he comes
to understand this suffering, this is the origin, this is the cessation, this is the way
that he's got. But those are four things, so four noble truths, but they're basically
all revolving around the same insight, insight into freedom from suffering. So, fully understanding
all the aspects of that can be put into four noble truths. You understand what it is. You
understand what it makes you be. You understand what it makes you not be. And then you understand
the way that leads out of it. And again, you can connect that to what we just said before.
Appropriating your own life, your own body, your own experience, regarding it is yours.
That makes you liable to suffering. Even if you don't necessarily suffer on the immediate
level, like even if there is nothing unpleasant bothering you, the fact that you are appropriate
to these things means there is always a looming possibility of suffering, and that in
itself is suffering. And that's what he recognizes. This is suffering. So, since
itself, I am cannot stand on its own. It always needs, and actually, it's founded upon
a foundation, a relationship. It's founded upon a relationship with the world. And that
relationship is for me, mine. But when you recognize them, that your sense of self depends
upon the world. And when I say the world, I mean experience as a whole. I mean, your
sights, your sounds, melt taste touches, things that you are experiencing. That's what your
sense of self depends on. So, if you then start reflecting and seeing, attending to properly,
seeing the these things that you see here, taste touch are fundamentally out of your control.
You might access this degree of the volition once a thing has arisen. But even that volition
is within much greater image of non-control. Why? Because as I said, your heart can stop
any second. And you can't even conceive having a say in that. And yet your whole life,
all the things you experienced, all the things that you will experience, all the things
you are experiencing right now, depends upon that beating muscle in your chest, that pumps
blood. That's it. It's as random as this stream around us, that kind of runs over these
rocks and moves the leaves and branches or whatever. It's as movement. But you can also
see as a memory, you can't remember that putting your heart together, putting your body
together, and then becoming that body over, you know, as you just had it. Yeah, it was
just given to you. It's just given to you. It's just given to you. So you're not saying
it's assembly, you're not saying it's operating and you certainly have no say in it's ending.
Yet you regard it as yours. I mean, that is the discrepancy at the most fundamental
existential level. You undo that discrepancy means you're attending things properly. That
means your attention does not maintain that mistake. It does not maintain that discrepancy,
which is a wrong attention. And that's attention of everybody. That pathogena attends, and
every attention maintains that wrong order. Me first, my experience second. It means
being such a relative. Exactly. Those are the result of that discrepancy that the pathogen
is maintaining. So by seeing that you can't even own these things even if you want to,
no matter how hard you want to, you recognize, oh, thinking that I own them, or rather entertaining
the notions of ownership. Well, that's what suffering is. So then you recognize this is
suffering. The arising of suffering is this very notion of ownership in regard to things
that cannot be owned. And then consequently, the cessation of suffering is not the cessation
of things that cannot be owned. You know, the Buddha did not have to kill himself in order
to understand the nature of life. No, while you are alive, you understand the cessation
of life. The cessation of life is cessation of appropriation of life. So he understands
that cessation of suffering is removing of appropriation in regard to your life, your
existence, you don't own it, removing the ownership, disowning it, not entertaining it.
And then how you fulfill that, that's the phonoboture. Oh, this is the path that leads to
this fulfillment, to this cessation of suffering. And then it's basically the everything that
revolves around right view and right attention and right mindfulness. Which means that through
right view, right attention and right mindfulness, constant practice, it will eventually saturate
your whole life regardless of the circumstances, regardless of the feelings that have a reason,
regardless of the pleasant unpleasant agreeable, disagreeable perception, regardless of everything,
right view, right intention, right mindfulness, been brought to fulfillment, there will not
be any kind of rekindling, so to speak, of the wrong order of that mistaken notion of ownership,
of that habit, basically, of ownership of that discrepancy. And that's when noble
belief of path has been practiced with fulfillment. So there are no traces of that discrepancy
left of those wrong notions left in any regard, in regard in regard to any sense or any thought
or any memory or any future plan. It's all saturated with the right attention, with
the right mindfulness, with the right view. They then obviously, it's right effort, right
reliability and so on. Right concentration. Right composure. Right composure, that's a
better translation, yeah. He doesn't say about the taints to be abandoned by the straining.
Here, bigger reflecting wisely abides with the eye of faculty restrained, while taints
dexation fever might arise in one who abides with the eye of faculty under strain, there
are no taints, a fexational fever in one who abides with the eye of faculty restrained.
And so, likewise, with all the other senses. It's quite simple. Well, exactly, yeah, straight
forward, yeah. Well, once the right view is established, that won't work. Well, none
of that will work for somebody who doesn't have the right view as the suit opens up, yeah.
It's the one for the one who sees, one who knows and one who sees. So once the right view
has established, then the one with the right view reckons is, okay, now it's about guarding
the senses, practicing the restraint. So none of the mistaken notions, the habits of
mistaken notions and discrepancies that are spread or maintained through last a version
of delusion, none of those will be arising to practicing the restraint. You stick to
there long enough, and then they just, it becomes been possible for them to arise. It's
like, like, basically having a habit and then kind of getting rid of the habit. You have
to stick to the opposite behavior or to the restraint of the habit for a certain amount
of time, depending on how strong those habits were. So once you stick to it and practice
restraint and so on, and those habits stop arising, that's it. And then the noble disciple
there's the right proper attention. It tends to be abandoned by using a bigger reflecting
of what properly uses the robe only for protection from cold, from protection from heat, from contact
with flies, mosquitoes, wind, and the sun, and creeping things, and only for the purpose
of concealing the private parts. Reflecting properly, he uses alms food, neither for amusement,
nor for intoxication, nor for the sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only
for the endurance and continuance of this body, for ending this comfort and for assisting
of the holy life. Considering thus, I shall terminate old feelings without erasing new
feelings, and I shall be healthy and blameless and shall live in comfort. What do you mean
by not erasing new feelings? Well, like the feeling of hunger, eating too much.
Yes, so you eat until the old feeling disappears, or hunger, but you don't overeat, so then
you have a new feeling of discomfort of being overeat, overeat. So he uses the resting
places, dwellings, only for protection from cold, from protection from heat, for protection
from contact with flies, mosquitoes, wind, and the sun, and creeping things, and only
for the purpose of warding off the perils of climate and for enjoying retreat. Reflecting
properly, he uses the medicinal requisites, only for protection from erasing, afflicting
feelings, and for the benefits of good health. While taints, vexation and fever might arise
in one who does not use the requisite task, there are no taints, vexation of feeling
like he uses them, thus these are called the taints that should be abandoned by using.
Because in most of the time, in monasteries, that's what you try to do, you try to use
those requisites as a monk, like that. That's before you have proper attention.
I mean, it's something to aspire, sure, but obviously, if you want that to result in the
abandoning of the taints, the right view is necessary, the right view comes first, it
will be said that many times, it needs to come first. If you don't know what you're supposed
to do, how can you do it? That's as simple as that. If you don't know what a dama is, how
can you practice it? There's the taints to be abandoned by enduring. Here are a big collecting
property, bears, cold and heat, hunger and thirst, and contact with flies, mosquitoes,
wind and sun, creeping things. He endures, ill-spoken, unwelcome words, and arisen bodily
feelings that are painful, sharp, piercing, disagreeable, distressing and menacing to life.
While taints, a vexation of evil might arise in one who does not endure such things, there
are no taints, vexation or feelings in one who endures them. So how does he endures the
weather, uncomfortable feelings, painful experiences? By becoming, a lot of people can endure
these things. Again, he will not, yeah, exactly, but he will not result in destruction of
lust, aversion and delusion if there is no right view. With the right view and with the
hardship, anything that was dependent, any of those habits, any of those discrepancies,
they were kind of hiding about, dependent upon cherishing the notions of comfort, for
example, will be destroyed with the right view that puts one through discomfort. So this
comfort founded upon the right view will destroy any of the taints. It doesn't mean that
the taints wouldn't be there, but in case they were, they would be destroyed. That's
why the Buddha sometimes, like for some monks, with the right view, ascetic practice,
do tangas, would be resulting in our hardship in developing further wisdom. For some other
monks, with the right view, it wouldn't. So he said, let those who want to exert themselves
in such practices, exert themselves at practices. But again, either way, the right view needs
to be there. So because, you know, people, people's habits have evolved differently. People's
lust have proliferated differently. Obviously, the existential discrepancies are the same,
but the particular manifestations of it, yeah, there needs to be addressed. So it's basically
like, you know, you might not necessarily target one by one, but you put yourself out
through some discomfort in case things are there. It's basically like taking antibiotics
to wipe the harmful bacteria. So you can aim at one or two, well, yeah, just you take
a generic one, and you know, it will be covered to do it long enough. It will address it.
So that's why that's what all the things means. Basically, if you go through all of those
ways, there was absolutely nothing for anyone in the world with the right view that would
be left. Because, you know, the things that you'll be destroying by seeing, but then, yeah,
so somebody there might be all. He might be, might be enough. However, most likely, there
will be some other things hiding elsewhere, and then basically by going through all of those
through restraint, through enduring, through hardship, through seeing, they will remain
nothing uncovered. Because again, like, like, like antibiotics, let's get back to them.
Some are good for respiratory infections, but you know, some bacteria is resistant to it.
So you might not necessarily have those bacteria, and okay, if you become an out of hand by
taking only one or two, by practicing only one or two forms of the destruction of taints,
that's fine. So if you become completely healthy by taking one or two antibiotics, that's
fine. But if you know that you've taken one or two sufficiently enough, but you're still
not fully healthy, okay, so there are issues elsewhere, then you try a different antibiotics.
So basically, if somebody who gains the right view, reviews their mind, and okay, I go
to the right view, but I'm not an out of hand. It means there are taints to be done, to
be done with, to be, to be, to be dealt with. And that's, that's when you, when you start
doing through restraint, got in the sense faculties. Okay, yes, sensuality might not be rising
anymore, but I still don't feel that I've reached the unsupervised security for bondage.
Okay, push yourself, take yourself out into discomfort, endure, avoid, and so on, and
then, yes, eventually, you covered all the bases, and the arhanship will have to be the
result. Yeah, that's what you said, avoiding the next one. Yeah, wisely avoid it. Yeah,
he avoids wild elephants. Exactly. So he recognizes that he's not an arhaniyet. Does he
need more time to apply himself? Thus, it will be very foolish to stand in front of the
wild elephant, because it, quite likely, it will result in his death. Same with the wild
dog, charcoal, no, no, no, sorry, cesspit, cesspit, cesspit, not, yeah, cliff, cliff,
cliff, things they can kill you. Unsuitable seats, wandering, unsuitable places. Yeah, things
they can compromise you, things they can kill you. Yeah, bad friends. Yeah, things they
can distract you from the go. Avoid it. Thanks be to God by removing, which is gone. Here
a bicker reflecting properly does not tolerate an arisen thought of central desire. He
abandons it, he removes it, does away with it, annihilates it, or an a thought of ill will,
a thought of cruelty. He does not tolerate arisen evil unwholesome states. He abandons
it, removes it, does away with it, annihilates it, tends to be abandoned by developing. He
reflects why it develops mindfulness and lightening factor, which is, he develops the
seven factors of enlightenment. And each factor is supported by seclusion, dispassion, cessation,
and ripens in the linkishment. What do you think that means? Seclusion, dispassion, and
cessation. Each mindfulness factor is supported by seclusion. Yeah, seclusion for my wholesome
states. Dispassion. Dispassion. Dispassion. Dispassion with results in dispassion, because
you are not attracted to things anymore, cessation of suffering, cessation of lust, the version
delusion, and the linkishment, freedom, and the freedom.
Here ripens in the linkishment. Yeah. So those, that, because, is it, is it? Yeah.
And a bicker who dwells restrained with the strength of all the taints, he has severed craving,
flung off the fetters, and with the complete penetration of conceit, he has made an end
of suffering. This was the best one said, the bickers were satisfied and delighted in the
best ones words.
