Actually, it's not only one question, it's probably two or three questions which are related.
So I just simply summarized the question, but then I would like to speak a little bit
about what actually I am aiming to or what I would like you to speak about.
The question is very quick, impermanent nature of six-cent basis and definition of six-cent
basis.
And what I am asking is because, you know, as regards external six-cent basis, it seems
almost like obvious that they are impermanent because they can't go into the range of our
experience.
But still, I feel that people, if you can actually explain what are even these external
six-cent basis because I already noticed by listening your talks that you can actually
look at things from some unusual perspective.
So even it looks obvious what it sounds or what it's formed, which is formed.
Maybe you can actually offer a little bit of something, some perspective which I didn't
consider.
But what are also internal six-cent basis, like I, and me, and especially Manon, because
that's not so obvious, so if you can speak about this.
And finally, how to actually see the impermanence of seven-cent basis, especially these internal
ones, because, you know, the whole life, you live this ear or this eye, so it seems
that they are always there.
So how to actually directly see their impermanent nature, not only indirectly, like contemplating
that before you were born and when you die, you would do so.
Oh, yeah, that wouldn't work.
Yeah.
Oh, no, not that sense of an insight, if you work in a sense of explanation.
Yeah.
So I would allow this phenomenological approach, how to actually see that the ear or the eye
is, and the mind is impermanent.
And well, let me start then with a first bit, with a six-centurnal basis, which we then,
I think it will make, obviously, what I mean, what I mean, what I mean when we're talking
about it, it talks about the external ones, because they're actually not the external counterparts
or the sense-based, the external objects are not actually easier to see as impermanent.
It's the common misconception of what the external world is, and then people assume that,
oh, yeah, this is ever-changing and impermanent, but that's not actually even on the level
of the external sense-based scene properly, on the external objects, sorry.
So the internal basis, basically, well, in a most practical approach, that's what your
body is.
Like you can divide it into six, you can say the eyes, the nose, the tongue, the body as
a sense of touch, and then the mind, it's obviously inseparated from the body as a whole.
You can pin it down to brain or you can pin it down to anything more particular, but the
point is, when there is no body, the mind cannot remain standing.
So in that sense, basically, on a practical level, it's the learning how to see the body
rightly would sort of reveal the whole six-fold sense-based scene properly as impermanent
and eventually as that which cannot be taken as self.
So for that practical approach, basically, what you need to see is that you can't take
up those senses, or you can't take up the body even if you want to, why?
Because it's structurally impossible to own it, you can't access it and make deals.
Not knowing that, you assume it's yours, you can't, you don't know that actually no actually
cannot be mine.
Like you know there's a phenomenon of mine that's something belonged to you.
Well these things are impenetrable to that, I mean you can't own them, but not knowing
that sufficiently enough, you own them just through that.
So if you want to see it impermanence, you don't need any explanation in terms of a previous
life and this future life, all you need to see is that that which has already arisen
eye your body, your six senses precede you, precede your sense of ownership, precede
your sense of self.
And by preceding means, oh, it comes first, I come second, that's I cannot be the master
of it, because if I'm the master of something, I come first.
So that which you think comes first actually comes second, and that which you think comes
second actually comes first.
And by dwelling just on that, accurately enough, you would stop regarding it as yours.
And then by literally by default, by simply by not regarding the internal sense basis
as yours, then everything else depends upon them, you won't be able to regard as your
either, which means you won't be affected by it.
Yes, it makes sense, but this is like an Anata aspect, but it seems that it's always Anata
comes after understanding properly Anichha.
So it comes after in a sense of, in a structural sense, not after in a sense of time, it's
the same insight.
Anichha duka is simultaneous insight of Anata on the level of self.
So if you see the depth upon which your sense of self depends, cannot be yours.
That sense of self is not your life, and that's what Anata is.
So the sense of self, it depends upon the sixfold base or the body, that's how it's come
taken, and then the self is assumed priority, and then the self owns these senses, owns
this body and operates with them.
But that's because there's no wisdom in a relative sense, and it's not seen that actually
is the sense of their rise on their own.
The body is given before him, you just find it, you find your right, you find the world
revealed by your rise and so on.
So if that's understood, then this self, it depends upon that body, cannot be owned
because this is seen as impossible to access in terms of that ownership.
So Anichha and duka automatically means it's felt like Anata, simultaneously.
So it's not one, two, three.
In terms of our first, you see Anichha, then you spend two, three days thinking about
duka, then you spend two, three days thinking about Anata.
If you see Anichha properly, that's what duka is, and that experience is a whole, will
not be the difference of the sense of self, because there is no room for the appropriation.
Can one, like, practice it, you know, during your day, you just remind yourself, this
understanding, is this the practice?
Well, it is to begin with, but then he has to become a more accurate in the sense of,
you actually, you have to be able to see what that phenomenon of the body, i.e. the
sense-based is, in your presence and experience, without having to analyze it, without having
to keep repeating what you read, are the eyes, this, the nose, this, and you just, when
you see it, you see it.
But probably in the beginning, you mean it, you mean it, yeah.
So basically, that's what I've been talking about.
I don't think maybe I didn't, we didn't upload them yet, but in the last few talks, it's
basically that any sort of contemplation you do cannot be just based on your thinking
as it is now, because that thinking as it is now is fully affected by ignorance, and
by wrong views.
So it means, even if you get the right instructions, you'll be applying them along the wrong lines.
So you want to begin to learn how to think properly phenomenologically, and thinking properly
means seeing things properly, that's it, because thoughts are images, they're being seen.
And you begin that by starting every contemplation, or any sort of reasoning, even, on the basis
of mindfulness, of the experience as a whole.
So you don't just kind of go in a mystical awe, or like, you know, including the experience
of the whole understanding.
No, that's just the beginning.
So you're mindful of the experience, and you're mindful of the situation, you're mindful
of the situation in this room, feeling certain mood, feeling certain feelings, having certain
perceptions.
And that's it.
So without losing the sight of that, you begin to think.
So basically, then the contemplation does not become like a, like a mental fabrication
instruction, it becomes more of a practice of discernment, practice of discernment, practice
of basically looking into, or rather finding things that you've been hearing about in this
which is in front of you, and that which is in front of you is that which is revealed
through that mindfulness of your situation, experience as a whole.
So in other words, what I'm saying is, things you want to contemplate, you don't want
to contemplate on your own terms, you want to find those things as already there in
that experience, which means you need to learn how to be properly mindful of the experience
so that these things can be discerned within that.
Why?
Because feeling is already there.
All of the six senses are depending on what approach you take, all of the six senses
are already there.
So you don't need to think about six senses and then explain to yourself what they are.
You just need to see them as they are right there while you're thinking about them.
And that can be done only on the basis of mindfulness.
That's where mindfulness always comes first, and that's where you can't have too much
of the mindfulness.
So without a mindfulness, no amount of precise instruction or anything like that can make
much of a difference because you just start on a wrong basis.
So can we say that mindfulness is like the establishing the working field on which you
are.
Sure.
Sure.
Yeah.
But even that mindfulness needs to be sort of recognized as if coming from the situation,
not coming from you and your intention to be mindful.
So is it also dependent on conditions, is it something also which can be without this?
Sure.
Yeah, of course.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Of course.
It's just obviously in the beginning, whatever you intend, whatever you directed attention
in your mind, it sort of assumed that it's rooted in the self.
So that's why the mindfulness is quite impersonal even for the self of you.
That's why it's a necessary base.
It's a kind of semi-neutral base from which you can go the other way, the right way.
But without it, you can't possibly go the right way because you're immediately already
in the wrong tracks, tracks of the sense of self.
So you try to get the mindfulness as strong as possible in a sense of as clear as non-interferent,
as wise as possible so that then the other tracks, tracks of non-self can be recognized.
And that just takes practice.
So is it to like to see the whole situation?
Well, again, now you're trying to kind of put the whole situation in front of you.
But as I said, you find yourself in it.
So instead of trying to put things in front of you, you step back into them because you
are already in them.
You are already in a situation where you want to be or not.
You are always in a situation.
That's where the four foundations of mindfulness, one of the main things are four postures
of the body.
Because you're always in a posture of the body, which is a kind of a symbol for a situation.
You're seated, you're walking while something else, you're lying down, you're standing,
and so on.
Actually those things are not just some weird kind of physiological sort of meditation
methods.
No, they're phenomena.
They're kind of rooting you back into a situation that you cannot escape from.
I see.
And so you recognize your situation, so it's just like a small movement behind, so to speak,
on the background, maybe you just recognize it, back it out, the background, yeah.
It's not vulnerable, you don't need to think much about it.
You just make this movement of mine to realize, just to include, so you don't need to include
anything that's in front of you now, but you just want to include more than what's in
front of you now, because that's not enough.
And you include that background, because that background, which is your situation, well,
if you include it long enough with a proper instruction, it becomes apparent, you have
no say in it.
And then you realize you have no say even in what's in front of you, because you can only
have things in front of you based on the background, based on the situation that has
a reason.
In other words, if you have no eyes, if there are no forms to be seen, wanting sites, having
desire towards sites, intentions towards sites, it's inconceivable.
Yeah.
It's just inconceivable.
You have that something that's completely taken for granted.
And that's how many people think they understood the truth, because as you can see, it makes
sense perfectly.
Yeah, sure.
There are no eyes, I couldn't see.
But if you were to truly understand that, you'd be free from any desire in regards to the
domain of sight, anything you ever seen, anything you ever would be seen.
You'd be almost an unorganic, basically.
So why that, why is that not happening then, because you realize, ah, so this understanding,
so to speak, it's actually understanding only if it's seen in proper terms, on its own
terms, not on your own terms.
Exactly.
It's actually not understanding at all, because if it is, well, it depends what you want
to use.
If you want to use understanding for, like, kind of intellectual sort of making sense,
then yeah, this is more than that.
But I think you can still use the same word understanding, because you share the same
nature of something being understood.
It's just not sufficient understanding, because you can understand things intellectually,
and then you can take it further, if you realize, okay, well, understanding is unlikely,
should free me from suffering.
My intellectual understanding, not free me from suffering, so I need to take it further.
I mean, you can take it further, by making further abstraction of you, but that's not
going to make any difference, and you will know that soon enough.
So then you take it further, basically, by kind of taking it deeper, or taking it backwards
so to speak, by spreading it about, by sort of, well, by making it pertain to the roots
of your experience.
And that's why it's kind of, young is someone that comes over as one of the main factors,
the right instruction, and that kind of root, attention, young is someone's womb, so
going back to the very origin.
Not origin, in terms of the explanation, like, 16 lifetimes ago or done, such a such thing.
No, the origin of your present situation, which is, you're given both the seed, the form
of it, the feelings, the simultaneously present with that, the perception, and so on,
the five aggregates.
So if you can even put it into the difference, if you can be also in relation to understanding,
sure.
And then it comes upon you.
Oh, that's wisdom.
Yeah, that's what it was like.
That's the final wisdom, man.
Yeah.
So, basically, that practice can be summarized, like, as much as you can to do this movement,
to go back to the mindfulness to see this root of your experience.
Yeah.
So you can see, basically, why, see, well, I hope you can see, because many people talk
about mindfulness.
It's not, you know, it's not a new thing.
But you could see how often tends to be either mystified or sort of played down, mystified
in a sense, when you'll hear the teachings often for the monks or for the other kind
of other teachers and other religions, but kind of also at the same basic, it could just
be present here and now, where everybody in your mind, and that's it.
That's it.
That's what it culminates.
That's it.
But that's actually, you could see, like, that's what go for them, where you could see,
if you were actually doing it right from the sutras, that should be only the very first
step there.
That's like that working field on issues, yeah, because, you know, I...
But people who have, people have a view, like if people don't know what they're supposed
to look for.
If they don't know that they are supposed to look for something, then they'll inevitably
automatically mystify their experience.
So even if they do the Buddhist mindfulness, they'll mystify it, because they'll just
be, you know, expecting it to teach them and to show them the reality or something, it
doesn't work for that.
You have to basically discern.
And that's why it's so hard, because you can see how, if a wrong instruction,
is given, or if a right instruction hasn't been sufficiently understood, you won't see
it, because you don't know what you're supposed to see.
So can they actually say, you know, some people, they say that actually just mindfulness
is enough in that sense, that it, when you practice it, other things reveal by themselves.
No.
Well, the other thing you reveal by themselves, only if you already have a basis of wisdom
and a criteria of the right view, I, if you're a sottipana, then all you have to do is
keep staying mindful and the virtues, and then things will be completely clear, because
you already have that knife that's cutting automatically, you just have to keep directing
it.
But for Patujana, it needs to be more than that.
Mindfulness, mindfulness is equal, as I said, it's kind of the most neutral aspect of
the experience of the revealing situation, but it still comes from the angle of Patujana.
And it can ultimately, recklessly or spontaneously just tip over and become a right view.
You have to make it so.
Yeah.
So you don't need that instruction.
Yeah.
Exactly.
Yeah, I see.
Because, you know, I was contemplating that if you go right for these retreats, you can
spend weeks or months practicing mindfulness, but without not much results.
Yeah.
And then it's like a question, how, actually, how many thousands of hours you need to do
this to move forward, or if it is actually completely into the inner requires, yeah.
And you can see, as you just see in yourself, when you're sort of trying to come around
what I was saying, like, even with the right instruction now, you're supposed to step back.
You can do that in an overly controlling manner, or I'm stepping back.
This is my situation, and you're actually over intending it, which means you're not really
stepping back.
It means you're the craving of your sense of self, of your intentionality, it's taking
over.
And that's something that will inevitably happen, and you just have to keep it in check.
And then sort of tune, fine tune, that attitude of stepping in without over intending it.
Yeah.
Because if you over intend the background, it becomes that which you intend in the foreground,
which means that at that time, something else is that background that you're not seeing.
Yeah.
But it also is actually quite difficult to grasp.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
That's why it's so easy to misunderstood.
That's why all of the meditation, the techniques and stuff.
They might be repeating these same things, but they do it with this kind of control of
kind of watching, touching, observing, observing, observing, all on the terms of the sense of
self.
That's what remains rooted in.
And then if you do step in, sometimes rightly, into that background without sort of over intending
it, then you don't know what you're supposed to look for.
Then you tend to mystify it.
And then you glorify that experience, but it's equally effective in the Vigia as it
was before.
It had potential for understanding if you were to have instructions that you can use to
discern what's supposed to be discerned, but without that, you won't, you just cannot.
I mean, it's still good to learn how to keep stepping because eventually, say that working
field has been developed properly, expanded, spread about more and more, even without the
right instruction.
Then you're going to need very little instruction eventually because you were used to the right
proper stepping into the situation, familiarize yourself with it, became established in it.
And then the Buddha can just tell you, are, in the scene, let there just be the scene and
there can be enough for you because you already done the actual work.
You just needed the last sort of drop of, ah, of course, yeah, I should have looked at
it like that.
And that's it.
But obviously, people kind of are not quite there either when they begin, so they sort
of, you have to be developing both, clarifying the instruction as much as you can, making
your sense out of it, not just reading it for inspiration, poetic value, or scholastic
merit.
And then you're going to need to be able to understand it, and simultaneously developing
your mind in terms of mindfulness, because that's what the mind is, it's the establishment
of mindfulness that sort of reaches a certain strength.
And the samadhi means composure, being composed, that field of working field, it remains composed
throughout the day, throughout the situations, throughout the circumstances, it remains composed,
mind is in samadhi, mind is composed, that you can say the same.
But because of the, as I said, because of this kind of attempt to mystify things, even
the play mindfulness, people mystify, then you start having, ah, sort of views of such
nature.
Views of, like, ah, that experience will teach you that it's been about the novel, it's
about the new experience, that you never experience, you must be the reality behind
and so on and on top of that.
So you end up building up lots of wrong views, just, just on account of that very simple
thing in the beginning.
Yeah.
And then when you say meditation, you immediately mind all of the things, it's some sort of
ecstatic absorption somewhere in some genre or some realm.
But even genres, like, you know, he enters in a biased genre and then whether he extends
his arm, whether he walks, whether he goes to eat the food, he's mind remained, ah, unaffected
by things.
And that's in the soup, but not according to the modern ideas of what genre is when
you kind of have gone, basically, motionless, like a rock or something like that.
So can we, can we now, ah, go back to this impermanent nature of Sixth and Sixth?
Sure.
So the impermanence of it, again, you can be reading into it things and you kind of have
to start like that, but you won't, even that, you, any understanding of the relevant nature,
you want to be discerning it from things.
So you know what you're supposed to look for, but you want to find it there.
So it's a kind of, it's like, as I said, things by themselves can't eat you, but just
your own thinking and explanation, self-explanation won't eat you either.
So you want to reach a degree of like, I'm looking for impermanence, how I understood it,
what understood it, I want to recognize it.
So it's about recognizing it in your experience that which you have understood, in this case,
impermanence.
And so probably the main characteristic permanence that I could sort of use that you could probably
relate to is the recognition that whenever you step into that situation properly, you
will always find your body as already there, which means you have actually no say in
its appearance, in its persistence.
And that's the important thing.
That's another thing that the people who don't do mindfulness correctly cannot understand,
the phenomenon of endurance, and I think we spoke about it before, when the Buddha says
that rising is manifest, ceasing is manifested, or phenomenon in general, changing well-standing
or enduring is manifested.
So people usually change the order of how the Buddha said that rising is manifested,
ceasing is manifested, changing well-standing is manifested, but the people say, a rising
is manifested, changing well-standing is manifested, ceasing is manifested, and you can see how
it becomes linear.
You see things are rising, you see things persisting, you see things disappearing, you see
things, and that leaves a sense of self-art.
Completely.
That's not space to mindfulness, that kind of view.
No matter how much mindfulness try to put in it, it won't work.
What you're going to find is things already there, which means you're going to find things
already persisting, which means it's the enduring, the third aspect, that's the most fundamental
aspect.
And you can see, if something is arising, if something is increasing in its presence,
it remains the same while changing.
If something is fading out, if something is ceasing, if something is decreasing in its
presence, it remains the same while fading out, while changing.
So you realize that arising or ceasing, persisting while changing is already present in those
things.
And that's how you learn to not interfere with things.
They endure on their own, because they have a reason on their own.
So the point is, by recognizing that things have a reason on their own, or recognizing
that whatever you find in this situation, you already find it there, enduring, either
increasing in its presence or decreasing in its presence, either way, it's persisting
while changing.
Just a different direction, so to speak.
So can you actually see something arising?
No, no, no, you can't see the first point, like, no, now there it is, because there
will be two separate things.
First no, that's the one reason thing, then something else, that's not.
So every change, every arising, every ceasing is abrupt, and that's when you're going
to be talking about as well.
It's abrupt.
It's abrupt?
Abrupt.
Abrupt.
So you just find it as arising, or you just find it as ceasing.
So all the time you're actually in that first phase, or that middle phase?
Exactly.
They're just changing directions, so to speak.
That's why arising is my, that's why often it's kind of permitted sometimes when it
says, oh, and then he remained contemplating, arising and falling of the five aggregates,
and he became an Arab.
Yes.
Because arising and falling is persisting while changing.
So he remains seeing things correctly, either as a situation, a reason beforehand, not
interfering, not appropriating, for the amount of time necessary, for the amount to become
pure.
So you say that arising and seeing is abrupt, and it's like two different experiences.
You're just finding, and as you find a situation, you find it either arising, or you find
it as ceasing.
Depending what's the main sort of color, so to speak.
So you can break it in the way that you compare your experience with previous experiences?
No.
The experience, with previous experience, means in your background, the both things together
are now one experience that you're thinking about, and you're not seeing it as such.
So that's what it means, also, like a colleague, a timeless.
It doesn't involve time, because no matter how much time it's involved in terms of its increasing
in its presence or decreasing, while remaining the same in simultaneously, with that kind of
time-line of a thing, simultaneously, things keep the identity of itself.
So there's no time involved between those things, and that's what you start seeing.
And seeing an identity of a thing is nothing other than seeing a nature of a thing, which
is nothing other than seeing dharma, because dharma means nature, dharma means the nature.
And but if you, if you basically observe this and you're changing by spending, cannot
happen that you think that it's stable, it's something which you're observing it, and
that's already in the state.
You can kind of observe it.
You can find it in that situation.
So you step back and you find yourself in the situation.
So you learn, it's all about learning how to step back and stay back without over-intending
and making it in front of you again.
And that's what the development of mine is, like 101.
So how to do it?
How to step back and try to clarify as much as possible what's stepping back and tell,
what you're supposed to discern, what you're supposed to find.
And if you do it long enough, then it will become more normal to see to find things as
opposed to overly intent things and put them in front of you as that which you think
things are.
So it's still formal thinking, but not that forward thinking, so to speak, which is usually
what people think thinking is.
So that's, it's on that level about impermanence is, because you already find a thing originally.
And you see, you can't even conceive where it would have come from.
Because even that, as in a recent experience, you already find it has come from.
So just the notion of it came from somewhere, becomes redundant.
Thus you stop conceiving things as in, out, apart, same, different, both same and different
and I, the same or different, none of those things continue to apply eventually for another
hand.
Yeah, because, yeah, as you said, you are always in, in the situation, you cannot actually
escape like with this body, and then you just, you just step back and you just see that
the body is dead, you know, it's all like the whole life is dead.
Exactly.
And that's why, by practicing that mindfulness, you start to develop what Nehru was talking
about, chitta, nimita, the sign of the mind, the sign of that phenomena, the sign of
the phenomena of the experience as a whole, which is what your mind is.
Your mind is with perception and feeling that simultaneously present, which is pretty much
as, as, as background as it can be.
So grasping the sign of that, basically by seeing that actually you're always in the situation,
you will stop assuming the existence of any notion of self or control or master independent
of any situation, which is what art of art is, assuming itself independent of the five
aggregates, assuming the self independent of the situation as a whole, assuming the self
as external to everything.
So the master is a creator, but you realize that even when you have that assumption, you
have it within the situation upon which has, which has a reason beforehand, so you realize
even that doesn't make sense anymore.
So you, having a self view, stops making sense, and then you can't have self-realism.
So it always comes after birth?
Yes, what is just, is just, the mind cannot engage in it anymore, because it's just seen
as a fully completely, completely contradictory.
So if I understand, it's well, the point is to correctly grasp this, let's say, practice,
correctly grasp this understanding, and then just repeat it, and repeat it, and repeat it.
Yeah.
Simultaneously to that, to keep sort of studying the meaning of the sutras or the instruction
or the instruction that you have faith in, that you can be a contemporary instruction,
so the instruction that you have faith in, not like any, because most of it won't lead
you this way.
If you send you like just a long year forward thinking, either through meditation technique
or something, or a mantra or what's not, I don't know.
So you want to keep sort of enriching your understanding of what you're supposed to recognize,
because the wider basis, the more information you have, the easier it's going to be to see.
But it seems very simple from sutras what we are supposed to recognize.
Yeah, and yeah, if your base is wide enough, if your stepping in situation is not corrupted
and it is today for most of the people, then yeah, you wouldn't need this very much.
You already need somebody to point you, no, no, no, look the other way, and then you
would see that.
And that's why people would sometimes just run into the Buddha and hear the teaching and
become a self-opinant, because, well, their notion, their daily experience, their average
experience of situation has not been polluted, has not been proliferated as it is today.
Like, you can see today, like, even if I talk, anybody talks about the notion of like
situation and time of phenomena, it's just like what?
Now, there's some weird philosophy or something, and people dismiss it.
And if you look where the people's views are on an average level, it's all about modern
science, where you just assume the public world, the public time, the public space, the
violin habit, and it's all in person, all of everything, and constantly changing and
stuff.
You assume that as external to your situation, but you fail to see that any assumption has
to remain within that situation, so assumption that assumes something external situation
is assumption that doesn't make sense.
It's impossible to assume anything external to the situation, because whatever you think
of, it's going to be within the situation.
You cannot step outside of that.
Not dwelling on that long enough, you develop all of the views that assume outside of it,
and that's all it takes.
That's where a video is effortless, ignorance, just ignoring that it's impossible to step
outside of the situation.
Not dwelling on it deep enough, it will make a video grow, that's it, you don't actually
have to engage in a video in any other manner, just ignore it, that's why it's called ignorance.
And that's why it's not a metaphysical ignorance, hidden somewhere, a secret that you need to
sort of, you know, unlock and a regal that you need to solve.
No, it's your very attitude, every single day, every single moment of your life, when
you turn away from your situation that has a reason, that's how you maintain your origin.
Just by looking at the wrong place, constantly, by assuming things in the wrong place.
One thing I was thinking of today, actually, was, let me just spoke a lot about the situation,
being mindful of it, and the stricken ones thinking of yourself in a situation, I've been
trying to think about what it exactly means to recognize on the situation, like obviously
I can give you some words, like sitting here, asking you a question, and you can actually
take your lives as far as you want to.
Because of the very thing, that's why it's so easy to mystify it, it's not easy to recognize
situations.
You might be thinking you recognize it, but then you start doubting, well, I'm a recognized
situation, or I'm a recognized in what I create to be a situation.
And if you have that doubt, it means, well, that's not a situation, the situation cannot
be accessed by doubt either, but you're doubting in situation.
So you can doubt situation, but if that's also a situation, and if that's seen, that
which has been seen, cannot be accessed by that doubt, that's being situational, so
to speak.
So that's why you just have to keep doing it, until that doubt of that very situation,
that you're in, stops touching that situation, so to speak, stops entering it.
Because again, and you can stop entering, basically, the situation with your doubt, by
recognizing the doubt, the very doubt, while you're doubting it, is within the situation.
It's really tricky, because even like I'm now sitting here, it seems to me that, now
I can do it once you are talking about it, but then the question is, is it religion
this?
No, because what you probably do is, you just, ah, I am in this situation, so you kind
of, again, originate from the sense of self, from the center of the I am, it's basically
learning how to see things very thoroughly, without looking in them directly.
That's how you start discerning the situation.
So whatever you're looking right now, you don't want to move your, look away from it,
because then it would become another thing you're looking at.
Yes.
So while you're looking at it, simultaneously, while you're looking at it, you want to
discern other things that you're not looking at directly, which is where your situation
is, which is when you body is, your moods, your feelings, the five aggregates, the background.
But if you look at the background directly, it's on the background and then, I don't know
if you have noticed on a kind of a clear, summer sky at night, full of stars.
And if you look at one star and you look long enough, and then you see lots of stars appearing
around it peripherally, but if you move your eyes from the central star and look at this,
you can't see them.
You can only see them peripherally.
You can only see them if you don't look at them directly.
And you check that sometimes, you'll see, well, this is the same principle.
The background can be revealed rightly only if you don't look at it directly.
That's why it's like learning how to see.
That's why it says, so the point is one who sees, because he suddenly saw it like that
and then learned how to see it.
Like, well, not suddenly saw it like that.
He kept trying to see it correctly, eventually built up the right scene and now he sees.
Because most of the stuff it's not seen.
The background is not seen.
It's hard.
We're always facing different things, one thing.
Yes.
And just with the different.
We don't want to another.
It's entirely obscured by people's looking, nothing else obscures it.
Like the only reason you don't see the peripher of that is because you stare it directly.
That's it.
But if staring, I think directly is your mode of existence, that's all you have.
And that's what it is for most people.
What I caught myself doing was like trying to take stock of things to find that you're
in the code there.
I'm feeling there.
Yes.
Yes.
No.
No.
No.
Yes.
The situation is the same thing.
Yes.
The firebag.
It is.
But it's not when you put them in front of them, which is not the aggregate.
You are not seeing the situation.
You are seeing what you put in front of you, which means you have left things out.
So it keeps making that effort to learn how to mindful of the background while you're looking
at different things.
Simultaneous to present a two layers of experience, so to speak.
Where did I brought up with you some time ago that I think it's good, because it seemed
to help me wrap my head around.
It was like a contact, like everything in a contact.
Sure.
There's something.
The things that buy itself, unify it.
Yes.
The context in the general level.
I think so.
It could be also other than that the context.
Sure.
Situation, there's already something, some significance applied in it.
It's not like just in personal listing of wall, chair, table, that's my situation, space
or something.
It's the meaning.
It's the feeling.
It's the mood.
Any of that is a background.
The firebag is at a background.
The nature of the firebag is at a background.
So the man you're practising for some days is a mindfulness here, taking your awareness
of a general situation and discerning a particular part of it.
Like the posture or the movements and going from there?
Well, first, the first set of potanas can be only done after they arrive here.
That doesn't mean you shouldn't be trying, but I don't think you're actually doing the
same until there is the complete clarity in regard to what situation is.
And then, well, basically then when you think about a posture, you think about the other
end of that situation, the background, almost with the fundamental basis.
That's why you can either think about a bodily posture or the body as a whole.
Like, he is mindful of the body internally, the body externally, the body internally
or he's mindful of the thought the body is there, that the body is there, to the extent
necessary for the final knowledge.
And that the body is there, pertains to that the firebag around with his mind is developed
to the extent necessary of seeing that background without appropriating it, without making it
foreground.
To the sufficient extent necessary to completely remove any appropriation of the body.
The body is there, the body is there, King Coconut is there, the cat is there, the dogs
are there, it's there, nothing to do with me, nothing, it cannot have anything to do
with me, even if I want to, it's just there to be.
And then you think about that long enough, let it endure whichever way it arises, whichever
way it ceases, you let it endure, in the sense the body is there, and you will remove
any sort of affinity, any sort of attitude, any assumption, any appropriation of the body
as much.
And it's regards mind.
Well, that's already, the mind is already included, because how can you see the background
without seeing your mind?
It's not like, see, if you were to think about your body in medical terms, then you would
need to mind out, and then the question you just asked would be valid, or where is
the mind then?
But you can see, if you see a body on that background level, as enduring, as in a reason
necessary basis for your experience as a whole, means your mind is already, that's where
your mind is.
You can't see the background without seeing the mind, because that's what the mind is.
That's where the satisfaction comes to mind, it just describes the mind in those ambiguous
background general terms, it is, his mind is elated, or has depressed, or has shrunk,
or is expanded, or is it light, or is it heavy, the background, the mood, the distance,
and the spirit.
That's what the mind is.
So as you can see, by thinking the mind is elsewhere, or opposed to the body, people
don't even see the basic notion of the mind, and that's what Chitanimity is.
And that's what people cannot get the right view, because one of the conditions for the
right view is Chitanimity, is the sign of the mind, that proper phenomenological sign
of the mind.
As it is, not as you projected to be, you find your mind there as well.
You find the mind expanded, shrunk, depressed, elated, happy, sad, you find it there.
In the same sense, you find the situation, you find it in that situation, it's found on
the base so that mindfulness, as everything else is, that's why mindfulness comes first,
there's the enlightenment factor.
We spoke recently about developing mind from ourselves, Chitanimity, whatever, I was also
thinking about what Chitanimity does, some part of perception and feeling, different
self-mind.
Just generally, how should that be understood as how it is today's experiment?
Well, if you would have the mind.
First you need to see the mind.
So if the mind is seen, then you can take that further, you can see what is this general
phenomenon, very general background, which you have discerning rightly as that background,
what does that further depend on?
And then you see it depends on the existence of the particular phenomenon of feeling and
the perception that simultaneously present, because without those things arisen, this
shape of the mind, this sort of attitude of the mind, this background, the mind would
not be developed at all, it's just inseparable from, you can't even conceive it separately.
You can just see when the mind means there has to be a feeling, there has to be a perception.
So is it something else, or can you just reduce it to feeling perception?
Feeling a perception as the base for the mind, yes.
And that mind is something else?
Well, yes, but not something else in the most elsewhere.
In the same sense, in the same sense, well, you can say feeling perception, feeling and
perception, that's what mind is.
So mind is not feeling, mind is not perception, feeling and perception, that's what mind is.
Because as you can see, there is no end to this background, really, it's infinite.
So you can see the feeling, you can see the perception, and you can see there is feeling
this perception, and that's another thing.
Well, actually, it's infinite in a sense of stepping back, but in a sense of mind development,
you could surmount feeling and perception, and then the mind will cease, and that's the
creation of perception and feeling.
But that's reserved only for those who have arrived, you could specify that discernment
of that relationship, of that time, that depends on these things, feeling perception, that's
what mind is.
It kind of similar, and slightly lesser level, so it's with lower level, with what I said,
feeling perception, intention, are inseparable.
They cannot possibly occur without each other.
No one can be preconceived apart, but they're not the same thing.
And that intention is basically where the mind comes down, feeling perception, the mind,
or feeling perception, intention.
You have been back to this thing very far away, that's the thing that doesn't mean that
you see also yours, that thing back.
You could, because that can become part of it, yeah.
Because at the attitude that's present in your situation, that you intend it, because
you've been reading the Dharma and so on, and want to practice.
That's why, Vijya, like this destruction of our Vijya, or Arahantship, Nibhana, is
dependent upon, directly dependent upon practicing the Dharma.
It doesn't sound direct, but you can see in this sense, oh, it was because of you, directly
making intentions of stepping back and developing knowledge resulted in Arahantship.
It's because you went there, that's what Arahantship was.
So it's because of the contract and the Dharma.
You know, because that brings another issue, when I was listening to your talks, quite
clearly, it is that to become an area, it cannot happen by chance.
You must put the thread and practice correctly to happen, but it also brings the kind of
things, you know, when you have been practicing here for years and years, you think effort
and not actually realizing anything.
Yeah.
If the effort was right, you could have not realized it.
That's it.
So it's as simple as that.
So one cannot actually blame anyone.
Yeah, absolutely.
For as long as your life functioning with your faculties intact,
it's absolutely a new mentality.
And that's why, that's why, basically, the longer you do it, without the results,
you should be more concerned.
Yes.
Because you do what is probably not the right way, because I don't just still need
anything.
But then, yes, it's not an easy sort of thing to admit to yourself.
Say, somebody's been sort of making up for 30, 40 years, and hasn't arrived at any sort
of distinction.
Like, 30 years, I mean, that's a lifetime of investment, of commitment and stuff.
And what you're going to do?
I'm going to scratch you and start from the beginning, or are you going to sort of
give in to the reputation, comfort, recognition, gain that you developed for the
30 years.
And then, sort of, just say, no, it's about this.
It's not about getting any of it.
It's not about developing distinction.
It's not about becoming sort of fun.
It's about just being here and now present for the mind, what not.
And that's what you hear from people.
But it also seems that, basically, the more you practice one day, more and more
difficult, to understand you, or to step to another kind of practice, because even
now I can see how hard it is actually to understand what we are talking about.
And I have been already listening for a few things this morning.
But you should also recognize that if you see even a little bit of value in what I'm
saying, that's already a big step forward.
That already means you already get some sense of the direction where I'm coming
from.
And most of the people just go over the head, just like, they either think, oh yeah,
of course, I wouldn't know that.
But they think, what are you talking about?
It makes completely no sense.
It's not about that.
Which means it's either overly or underly sort of look for.
This never kind of can see that there are levels where it actually is.
So if you even have a faint notion of, there might be something there.
Well, that's already quite a big opening.
Obviously, it's up to you to make that feel like a huge, but if you don't do it,
then it's just going to step for stability for an opening.
But it's on the edge of the opening.
But yeah, of course, it's hard.
If it were easy, you wouldn't need to put it.
That's why the woman said to me like, it's because of...
Anand said, no, it's so simple.
It's so clear to me.
Like, no, I can't say that.
It's because it's not.
It's so hard.
People remain bound for eons.
In eons, in eons, like countless eons of eons.
I kind of thinkable amount of time, just because of that.
Just because they cannot discern their direction.
And it cannot be discerned by itself.
Because if you succeed it, you become some assembled.
And you can see how insane that is.
Like, you're incomprehensible.
That's what I call, who am I to praise the Buddha?
Because they would realize the extent of somebody, like what they know,
because someone has a destruction.
If somebody finds that out by themselves.
How is that impossible?
It verges on the impossible.
But not quite.
And then somebody does it.
So you realize that it's just...
You can't even praise that.
This is beyond you.
And that's what's coming from the arrangements.
In the sutras, you would say, for who am I to praise the Buddha?
Because even with instruction, it's like,
virtually impossible for most people.
You've heard somebody finding that out for himself.
The extent of that effort.
And commitment and determination.
Yes.
Question in mind.
Mind is mano.
Mano.
There is a question in the beginning.
Right, as a sense.
Well, yeah.
Well, it's basically mano would be your reasoning.
You'll intellect your foreground of your thinking.
But you said also that it's like a Buddha.
Well, that's what Chita is.
That's what the Chita mind as Chita is.
Mano is, in the same sense, your eyes.
A foreground.
What you're thinking right away.
Which you're looking right away.
What you're smelling right away.
That's where mano is.
So you need to have mano discernment.
To point you in the direction to look beyond it.
Because you can have particular thoughts.
There's a scene in the general situation.
And the sight of the general situation.
The images of the general situation synchronically.
That's the level of Chita.
Those are the phenomena.
I see.
And I can be object to that.
That's what mine objects and mine are.
So if you need, in simple terms, think of,
mind as mano, think of that being like thoughts
to the concern with the five senses.
The thoughts are concerned with the background of it,
with the nature of it, with any of it.
The reflexive thoughts in regard to it,
they will not be the mano.
And it was abstract thoughts.
It depends.
Do they concern about sense of the mind?
Sure.
They are not concerned with sense of the mind.
You are thinking about whatever.
Like something.
Such as?
I don't know about nature of feelings.
Maybe or maybe about the nature of universe.
Well, you get something you will experience through senses.
Universe.
So you sense the mind.
Aha.
So you're thinking about the nature of it.
Then they will be like mano will be the actual thoughts
in regard to the sense of the mind.
But the nature of your reflection
upon that particular sense of the mind.
But you don't really have to worry about
much of a distinction between mano and chip and stuff.
Only have to do just this on it.
So it seems that the most,
the essence is to learn this,
seeing things very fairly.
That will step back.
And not to be involved as particular.
Yeah.
Not to disregard a particular idea,
but to learn how to see beyond it
while particularly present.
Yes.
So that's how you mind expands, literally.
Because mind is bound whatever you are looking at,
whatever you smell,
whatever occupies your attention that what people see.
Learning, while that's present to see,
well, beyond that,
simultaneously present,
while that is there,
may make some arm flicker, literally.
And how much you can do it, you know?
In that moment.
In that moment.
The growth can be indefinitely.
But you can do it to the extent necessary
for the final knowledge as Satyupadana took the sense.
Because I think that probably in the beginning,
it's only like when you remember it.
It's where you go here and there.
You just,
just being dried each time,
wherever something you arrive at.
And discerning that peripheral background correctly,
you can also,
you can also arrive at it with the,
by the recognition of the phenomenon of enduring,
often a reason thing,
or of the thing that's using enduring.
Because that means you kind of have to stay there with it,
but not fully particularly into it.
Because you have to see it changing,
while remaining the same.
You have to see it on two levels,
so to speak simultaneously present.
That's why you can approach it through that angle.
Like the three,
the three sort of aspects,
is a manifesto.
Or just the rising,
or just if,
or something said,
all there is a monk who is very proficient in,
in the rising.
It has enough for our entry.
All there is a monk who is very proficient in ceasing.
Why?
Because about changing,
in regard to rising,
to understand the full nature of independence of the aggregates
and everything into the possibility to only beneficial.
Or he uses positioning of changing
in regard to ceasing.
To understand fully nature of the aggregates,
and so on.
Or he uses positioning of changing,
in regard to positioning of changing,
to fully understand the nature of the aggregates
and stuff of preicure kingdom,
becoming bent around.
Because ceasing is manifesto.
rising is manifesto.
It's not like ceasing in the actual cessation that you witness, a destruction of things.
Otherwise, if it's a destruction of a thing, then that's what's manifested. That's what has arisen.
You can see the destruction can take place only on a particular level.
I think being destroyed, I change in a shape. Still remaining a thing or change becoming a different thing because it's not.
It's not the same thing from before, but it's still a thing that came found in the situation.
In other words, it's not cessation, it's not missing the ending.
This means a different direction from arising, so to speak. Increasing or ceasing, either way, existing or changing.
But usually people just tend to quickly bond it together, cessation means ending.
So, yeah, I can see these branches falling down, trees breaking, everything is impermanent.
That experience has a reason for you. The experience of a tree being broken down.
That's what has arisen in your experience. So, it's actually arising here.
So, you basically look outside to just watch your experience.
And that's why we're creating a distinction saying, the impermanence that the Buddha was talking about
is impermanence that if understood, it's easy from suffering.
And the tree being destroyed makes no difference to it. Unless you're emotionally bound with those trees.
And then you suffer on cancer. But not because they're being destroyed, but because you're attached to them.
Because the cause of suffering is not the destruction of things. The cause is your craving in regard to them.
So, you would still, even then, look at the wrong place. If you assume the cessation is a destruction.
So, a reception we could think of, for example, crispy. It's like sitting around.
It's okay, there's a situation that I find myself in.
And within that, there is also a thought of the body anyway, even just the basic on there is the body.
And if you understand, firstly, the nature of matter, of consciousness, basically that, you know, they're beneath your feet paired with each other,
you know, saying them whatsoever and that everything is an entire situation arose because of that.
Sure.
Because all you can have is thoughts, imagines, damas.
That's exactly what things are.
So, you can also just, in the, let's say you're mindful of the situation properly, or at least sort of sufficiently.
If you have a thought like, oh, this body is there, well, see where that thought is directed. What is it aiming at?
What is it referring to?
What is that that you're trying to designate by that thought?
Because that's often like done player for people. And then you just end up carrying on the assumption
that they were completely gratuitous to begin with. But because you never looked at their gratuitous, you keep keeping them.
You keep maintaining them.
So, like when you say, all these bodies, well, what am I referring to specifically?
They were referring to the bit that I see with my eyes, where I feel this feeling of touch of the chair and the table I'm leaning on, or the age,
or feel that they refer to the heat, or the energy, or whatever, what am I referring to?
And just find out what you're referring to in the general situation. What is this being directed at when I say?
Because it has to be directed upon something, because if this thing hasn't been a reason at all, you wouldn't be able to call it in any terms.
But the failure you can call it, sometimes means you are having some sort of notion of it. That's why it is possible to step back properly.
And then this one, because the aggregates are there.
Theoretically, then, any kind of thing you're referring to, so let me just understand that the actual matter of the body is not that which you are pointing to could be taken sufficiently to say this is the body.
Sort of, say it again.
Which means any method you're referring to?
No, like, as long as you understand that whatever you're delegating, that body is not the matter of the body.
Right, right, right, right, yeah, because what people think, what they're doing is...
