So this is the Majuminikaya 75 to Magandia.
Thus have I heard.
I want to occasion the blessed one was living in Prudu country where there was a town of
Prudu's name, Kamasama, Kamasama. On a spread of grass in the fire chamber of a
Brahmin belonging to the Buddha Vajra clan, then when it was morning, the blessed one dressed
and taking his bow and outer road went into Kamasadama for alms. He had wandered for alms
in Kamasadama and had returned from his alms. After his meal, he went to a certain
road for the days of biding. Having entered the grove, he sat down at the root of the tree
for the days of biding. Then the wanderer, Magandia, while walking and wandering for exercise,
went to the fire chamber of the Brahmin belonging to the Buddha Vajra clan.
There he saw a spread of grass prepared and asked the Brahmin, for whom has this spread
of grass being prepared in the master Bhada Vajra's fire chamber. It seems like it might
be a recruse's bed.
Master Magandia, there is a recruse Goetama, the son of the Suckian, who went forth from
the Suckian clan. Now a good report of the master Goetama has been spread to this effect.
Blessed one is accomplished fully enlightened, perfect and true knowledge and conduct, supplying
nowhere of world's incomparable leader of persons to be attained. Teacher of gods and
rumours, enlightened, blessed. This bed has been prepared for that master Goetama.
Indeed Master Bhada Vajra, it is an ill sight we see when we see the bed of that destroyer
of growth, Master Goetama. Be careful what you say, Magandia. Be careful what you say.
Many learned nobles, learned Brahmins, learned householders and learned recruses at full
confidence in Master Goetama and have been disciplined by him in a noble true way in
the Dhamma that is also.
Master Bhada Vajra, even if we saw that Master Goetama face to face, we would tell him
to his face. The recruse Goetama is a destroyer of growth. Why is that? Because that has come
down in our discourse. If Master Magandia has no objection, may I tell this to Master
Goetama. Let Master Bhada Vajra be at ease, tell him just what I have said. Meanwhile
with the divine ear which is purified and surpasses the human, the blessed one heard this
conversation between the Brahmin Bhada Vajra and the wanderer, Magandia. Then when it was
evening, the blessed one rose from meditation, went to the Brahmin's fire chamber and sat
down on the spread of grass made ready. Then the Brahmin Bhada Vajra went to the best one
and exchanged greetings within. When this courtesan amiable talk was finished, he sat down
on one side. The blessed one asked him, Bhada Vajra, did you have any conversation with
the wanderer, Magandia, about this very same spread of grass? When this was said, the Brahmin
all struck with his hair standing on end, replied, we wanted to tell Master Goetama about
that very thing, that Master Goetama has not anticipated us. But this discussion between
the blessed one and the Brahmin was left unfinished, for then the wanderer, Magandia, while
walking and wandering for exercise, came to the Brahmin's fire chamber and went up to
the blessed one. Each train's greetings with the blessed one, and when this courtesan amiable
talk was finished, he sat down at one side. The blessed one said to him, Magandia, the
eye delights in forms, takes the light in forms, rejoices in forms, that has been
maintained by the litigator, guarded, protected and restrained. Any teacher stood down
more for its restraints. Was it with reference to this that he said, the records go to
them as a destroyer of growth? It was reference to this Master Goetama that I said, the records
go to them as a destroyer of growth. Why is that? Because that is recorded in our
classroom. The ear delights in sounds, the nose delights in odours, the tongue delights
in flavours, the body delights in tangilies, the mind delights in mind objects, takes the
light in mind objects, rejoices in mind objects, that has been claimed by the litigator, guarded,
protected and restrained. Any teacher stood down more for its restraints. Was it with reference
to this that he said, the records go to them as a destroyer of growth? It was with reference
to this Master Goetama that I said, the records go to them as a destroyer of growth. Why
is that? Because that is recorded in our scriptures. What do you think, Magandia? Here, someone
may have formerly enjoyed himself with forms cognizable by the eye. That I wished for, desired,
agreeable and likable, connected with sensual desire and provocative of lust. On a later
occasion having understood as they actually are the origin, the disappearance and the gratification,
the danger and the escape in the case of forms. He might abandon the craving for forms,
remove fever for forms and abide without thirst with a mind inwardly at peace. What would
you say to him, Magandia? Nothing, Master Goetama. And light lies with sounds cognizable
by the ear, odours cognizable by the nose, flavours cognizable by the tongue and pendules
cognizable by the body. Magandia formerly, when I lived a home life, I enjoyed myself,
provided and endowed with five chords of sensual pleasure. The forms cognizable by the eye
and sounds cognizable by the ear, odours cognizable by the nose, flavours cognizable by the tongue,
the tangibles cognizable by the body that I wished for, desired, agreeable and likable,
connected with sensual desire and provocative of lust. I had three palaces, one for the rainy
season, one for the winter and one for the summer. I lived in the rain's palace for the
four months of the rainy season, enjoying myself with musicians, none of whom were men,
and I did not go down to the lower palace. On a later occasion, having understood this,
they actually are the origin of the disappearance, the gratification, the danger and escape. In
the case of sensual pleasures, I abandoned craving for sensual pleasures. I removed fever
for sensual pleasures, and I abide without thirst for the mind inwardly of peace. I see
other beings who are not free from lust for sensual pleasures, beings vowed by craving for
sensual pleasures, burning with the fever for sensual pleasures, indulging in sensual
pleasures, and I do not envy them nor do I delight them in. Why is that? Because there
is Magandia a delight apart from sensual pleasures, apart from unhulsing states, which surpasses
even divine bliss. Since I take delight in that, I do not envy what is interior nor do
I delight them in. Suppose Magandia a householder, or a householder's son was rich with great
wealth and property, and being provided in endowed with the five chords of sensual pleasure,
he might enjoy himself with forms cognizable by the eye, with sounds cognizable by the ear
of odours cognizable by the nose, with flavours cognizable by the tongue, with tangibles cognizable
by the body that I wished for desire, agreeable and viable, connected with sensual desire and
provocative of lust. Having conducted himself well in body, speech and mind, on the dissolution
of the body, after death, he might reappear in a happy destination, in the heavenly world,
in the retinue of the guards of the thirty-two, and they are surrounded by the group of
nymphs in the nun, nun, nun, dhana, and grove, he would enjoy himself, provided in endowed
with the five chords of divine sensual pleasure. Suppose then he sought a householder, or
a householder's son, enjoying himself, provided and endowed with the five chords of human
sensual pleasure. What do you think Magandia, who did young guards surrounded by the group
of nymphs and nun, under grove, enjoying himself, provided in endowed with the five chords
of divine sensual pleasure, envied the householder for the five chords of human sensual pleasure.
Or would he be enticed by human sensual pleasures? No master go to them. Why not? Because divine
sensual pleasures are more accidents and sublime than human sensual pleasures.
Suppose Magandia, he was a leper, with swords and blisters on his limbs, being devoured by
worms, scratching off the scouts, with his nails caught rising his body over a burning
charcoal pit, then his friends and companions, his kinsmen and relatives, would bring a physician
to treat him. The physician would take, would make medicine for him, and by means of
that medicine, the man would be cured of his leprosy, and would become well and happy,
independent, master himself, able to go where he wants, then he might see another leper
with swords and blisters, and scraping off the scouts with his nails, caught rising his
body over a burning charcoal pit. What do you think, Magandia, would that man envy that
leper for his burning charcoal pit, or his use of medicine? No master go to them. Why
is that? Because when there is sickness, there is need for medicine, and when there is
no sickness, there is no need for medicine. Suppose Magandia, there was a leper with swords
and blisters on his limbs, being devoured by worms, scratching off the scouts, or the openings
of his wounds for his nails, caught rising his body over a burning charcoal pit, then
his friends and companions, his kinsmen and relatives, brought a physician to treat him.
The physician would make medicine for him, and by means of that medicine, that man would
be cured of his leprosy, and would become well and happy, independent, master of himself,
able to go where he likes. Then two strong men would seize him, both by art, with both
by art, seize him by both arms, and drag him towards a burning charcoal pit. What do
you think Magandia? Would that man twist his body this way and let? Yes, master go to
them. Why is that? Because that fire is indeed painful to touch, huts and scorching. What
do you think Magandia? Is it only now that the fire is painful to touch, huts and scorching,
or previously too, was that fire painful to touch, huts and scorching? Master go to them,
that fire is now painful to touch, huts and scorching, and previously too, that fire
was painful to touch, huts and scorching. For when that man was a leprosy, with swords
and blisters on his limbs, being devoured by worms scratching the scab of the openings
of his wounds, wounds with his nails, his faculties were impaired, thus though the fire
was actually painful to touch, he would acquire a mistaken perception of it as pleasant.
So too, Magandia, in the past, central pleasures were painful to touch, huts and scorching.
In the future, central pleasures will be painful to touch, huts and scorching, and now
at present, central pleasures are painful to touch, huts and scorching. But these beings
who are not free from lust for central pleasures, who are devoured by craving for central pleasures,
who burn with the fever for central pleasures, faculties that are impaired, thus those central
pleasures are actually painful to touch, they acquire a mistaken perception of them as pleasant.
Well, on that note, that's what I was saying yesterday in this program, when I was explaining
that when people initially start practicing the restraint, they might feel like pain,
pain in regard to sensuality, they see something with their eye, something pleasant, something
with their ear or with their tongue, and it could be assumed that that pain was because
of the restraint placed upon the senses. But actually, if one sticks to the restraint
and doesn't give in to the senses, it becomes apparent that that pain is the very nature
of the senses, of the central core, of the central desire. Which means that pain was always
there, it just was never felt because it was never existed, because one just went with
it, so in order to not feel the pain of that dark, you just quickly succumb, quickly say
yes, so it doesn't hurt you. And the similarly I gave yesterday, I think, we didn't
record it, but was like imagine you have a very, very strong dog on the leaf and something
comes in its eyesight and you see it's beginning to run for it. And you know the dog is powerful
and if you stay in the place where you were, it's just going to rip your arm and it's going
to be very unpleasant and very painful. So, you just start running with it. And then
obviously you develop also to use on a kind of enjoying the run or whatever else, when
in reality you really have no choice. But going with the senses, why? Because saying
no to it is just dreadful. You can terrify people and make them freak out. And that's
why sometimes when the circumstances place a restraint on you, so to speak, when you
can't get what you want, it drives people mad, that pain. So basically, even from the
day one, when somebody starts practicing the restraint, the pain of restraint, it's
not caused by the restraint, it's revealed by the restraint and that is the pain of
the senses and sensual pain. And that's exactly what I would have said. All of us even
when you were enjoying the senses in the past and all those people who will enjoy them
in the future, those sensual pleasures are actually painful, like that fire that was
always painful. So only the mind that is impaired in regard to that nature would blame the pain
to lack of satisfaction of your senses, not the lack of actually understanding of the
senses. So then when people feel pain on a ton of senses, they think it's because they
haven't indulged them enough, they blame the restraint. But it's completely the other
way around. It's the actual delight and lust, it's the dark that affects you, that it's
so unpleasant that you kind of automatically just go for it, go for the pleasure. And then
not just that you mask, cover up the dark, but then you also get the pleasure that kind
of contain in the senses. So then you feel like you win both ways. You feel like you avoid
the pain and you feel like you enjoy the pleasure on top of it. But the fact is that that
is not optional. I mean, fundamentally it is optional, but for most people, it isn't,
they're just too weak to say no to it. The fact that they're always driven by it means
basically they're always slaves to it and that is no pleasure at all.
But they don't see the actual fever, the burning. No, no. They blame the fever, the burning
to the lack of satisfaction. So then they just think I just have to go harder for it until
the fever, the burning disappears. But it doesn't disappear. You just cover it up. So
you pursue the desire more, it does not make the fever and burning disappear, it makes
it increase, it makes it burn even harder next time, which is going to make you run for
it even harder as a result. But the whole kind of, the only thing you're going to accomplish
is cover up, cover up of the same burning embers. You're about burning, yeah. Like the left
is, it just has to take the charcoal to the closer burning. So the pain of the sense
desire that's revealed by the restraint and just repeating that is belongs to the sense
desire, not the restraint. The restraint merely reveals it. Hence the restraint is the
necessary precondition for the rising of wisdom, for the rising of the understanding of
the nature of things.
But if you, if you're a stranger, you still have the, at all, the pain of the sense is
still there. But you're not going further and getting more feverish.
And the pain, the pain will be there for as long as it doesn't sink deep enough that
the pain does not belong to the restraint, it belongs to the senses. And for that very
reason, the restraint is actually quite pleasant. Fire will always be hot, even a hundred
miles away from you. But now that you're not pulled towards it and you know there is
no danger of you falling into that burning pit, you know it is. Why? Because of your
restraint, because you don't go anywhere near it. Hence the pleasure of renunciation always
shrunk the pleasure of, of sensuality.
Yeah, the pain, the pleasure of sensuality is always there, it's always there.
Exactly. But your mind will be, it will go everywhere else away from that sensual pleasure.
Like that man was being dragged by the two stronger men to a pit, he would want to be
everywhere else but that pit. Because you recognize that the whole pain, the whole kind
of drama and proliferation and everything else and mess that comes with it, it's all on
account of the sensual pleasures. So all you have to do is say, note it and you're literally
free from that entire domain of misfortune. And there was another sort of it, but I did
say all the fathers fight with sons, sons fight with mothers, brothers with sisters, brothers
with brothers, kings with kings, nations, all on account of sensual pleasures, all on
account of sensuality. All of the wars that are being waged, that will be waged, it's all
on account of sensuality, nothing else. But it's all of that, it might not mean anything
if a person on that individual, private personal level still don't recognize the pain of sensuality
belonging to the actual sensuality. So the pain of saying no to sensuality belonging
to the actual sensuality, not to you saying no. Saying no merely reveals it.
So Sutta continues, suppose Magandha there was a leopard with swords and blisters on his
wings, being devoured by worms, stretching the scarves off the openings of his wounds for
his nails, quarterising his body over a burning charcoal pit. The more he stretches the scarves
and quarterises his body, the fowler, more evil smelling and more infected the wounds,
the openings of his wounds would become. Yet he would find a certain measure of satisfaction
and enjoyment in stretching the openings of his wounds. That's just what I said. Basically
the more you cover it up, the more you'll need to cover it up. And the more you'll assume
that covering up is sorting it out. So you will get some satisfaction in pursuing desire
because basically makes you forget about the pain caused by the very desire. Yes, it's
become a more evil smell. Because that's all you can do. Make you forget about the pain.
And that's why you can never satisfy a desire. And its nature is insatiable.
For the very reason, that all you can do is forget about the pain, the pain, the dark,
that it causes too. That's what people like to elaborate on their desires, not just going
to satisfy them. Because if it provides a more elaborate, forgetful cover up of the actual pain.
But only so for that dark to arise again, to hit you again.
And then when your senses do break apart, when you can't use any of those domains for this
game of cover up, then you just left with the pain. Which is why all age can be very high.
For those who depend on their senses more than others.
And continues, so too, Magandia beings who are not given last
percentual pleasures, who are devoured by craving for central pleasures,
who burn with the fever for central pleasures still indulge in central pleasures.
The more such beings indulge in central pleasures, the more they're craving for central pleasures
increases. And then more, they are burned with their fever for central pleasures. Yet they find
a certain measure, a satisfaction, an enjoyment, independence, and a five-cold central pleasure.
What do you think, Magandia? Have you ever seen or heard of a king or a king's minister enjoying
himself, provided an endowed with a five-cold central pleasure, who without abandoning
craving for central pleasures, without removing fever for central pleasures,
was able to abide, free from thirst, with a mind ingridly at peace,
or who is able, or who will be able to abide, help to so abide. No, master God to me.
Good, Magandia, I too have never seen or heard of a king or a king's minister enjoying himself.
Without abandoning craving for central pleasures, without removing fever for central pleasures,
who was able to abide, free from thirst, with a mind ingridly at peace, or who is,
who is able, or who will be able to so abide. On the contrary, Magandia, those recluses of
Romans who abide, or abide, or will abide, free from thirst, with a mind ingridly at peace,
all do so after having understood, as they actually are, the origin, the disappearance,
the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the case of central pleasures,
and it is after abandoning craving for central pleasures and removing fever from central pleasures,
that they abide, or abide, or will abide, free from thirst, with a mind ingridly at peace.
Then, at that point, the best one uttered this exclamation.
The greatest of all games is health. Nibbana is the greatest bliss. The eightfold path is the best
of paths, for it leads safely to the deathless. When this was said, the wonderer Magandia said,
to the best one, it is wonderful Master Gautama, it is marvelous how well that has been expressed
by Master Gautama. The greatest of all games is health. Nibbana is the greatest bliss. We too
have heard earlier wanderers who were teachers and teachers of teachers saying this, and it agrees
with Master Gautama. But Magandia, when you heard earlier wanderers who were teachers and teachers
of teachers saying this, what is it? What is that health? What is that Nibbana? When this was said,
the wonderer Magandia rubbed his own limb with his hands and said, this is that health, Master Gautama,
this is that Nibbana, who I am now healthy and happy, and nothing afflicts me.
Bless you. Magandia, suppose there was a man born blind who could not see dark and light forms,
who could not see blue, yellow, red or pink forms, who could not see what was even and uneven,
who could not see the stars of the sun and the moon. He might hear a man, hear a man with good
eyesight saying, good indeed serves as a white cloth, beautiful, sparkless and clean, and he would go
in search of a white cloth. Then a man were cheating with the dirty soil garments of us. Good man,
here as a white cloth for you, beautiful, sparkless and clean, and he would accept it and put it on,
and being satisfied with it, he would utter words of satisfaction thus. Good indeed serves as a
white cloth, beautiful, sparkless and clean. What do you think, Magandia, when that man born blind
accepted that dirty soil garment, put it on when being satisfied with it, uttered words of
satisfaction thus. Good indeed serves as a white cloth, beautiful, sparkless and clean.
Did he do so knowing and seeing or utter faith in the man with good eyesight? When also he would
have done so unknowing and unseen, utter faith in the man with good eyesight. So too, Magandia,
the wonderers of other sects, are blind and visionless. They do not know how, they do not see
Nibbana yet they utter this stanza thus. The greatest of all gains is health. Nibbana is the greatest bliss.
This stanza was uttered by the earlier accomplished ones, fully enlightened ones thus. The greatest of all
gains is health. Nibbana is the greatest bliss. The eightfold path is the best of paths,
but leads to safety to forgetfulness. Now it has gradually become current among ordinary people.
And although this body, Magandia, is a disease, a tumor, a dart, a calamity, and an affliction,
referring to this body, you say, this is that health, Master Gautama, this is that Nibbana.
You do not have that noble vision, Magandia, by means of which you might know how, and see Nibbana.
I have confidence in Master Gautama thus. Master Gautama is capable of teaching me the Dhamma
in such a way that I can come to know how and to see Nibbana. Magandia, suppose there was a man
born blind who cannot see dark and light forms, then his friends and companions, his kinsmen and
relatives, would bring a physician to treat him. The physician would make a medicine for him,
yet by means of that medicine, the man's vision would not arise or be purified.
What do you think, Magandia? Would the doctor reap weariness and disappointment?
Yes, Master Gautama. So too, Magandia, if I were to teach you the Dhamma thus,
this is that health, this is that Nibbana. You might not know that health or see Nibbana,
and there would be weariness and troublesome for me.
I have confidence in Master Gautama thus. Master Gautama is capable of teaching me the Dhamma
in such a way that I can come to know how and see Nibbana.
Magandia, suppose there was a man born blind who could not see dark and light forms,
he might hear a man with good eyes saying, good indeed serves as a white cuff,
beautiful, spotless and clean. Anywhere you go in search of a white cuff,
then a man were cheating with a dirty soil garment. Thus, good man hears a white cuff,
and he would accept it and put it off. Then his friends and companions would bring a physician
to treat him, a physician would make medicine, appointments, encountering some nasal treatments,
and by means of that medicine the man's vision would arise and be purified.
Together with the rising of his vision, his desire and liking for that dirty soil garment would
be abandoned. Then he might burn with dignity, ill will towards that man and might think that
he ought to be killed thus. Indeed, I have long been tricked and cheated,
and he frauded by this man's dirty soil garment when he told me, good man,
here's a white cuff for you, beautiful, spotless and clean.
So to Magandia, if I were to teach you the Dhamma,
thus, this is that health, this is that nibbana. You might know health and see nibbana.
Together with the rising of your vision, your desire and lust for the five aggregates
affected by assumption might be abandoned. Then perhaps you might think,
indeed, I have been long tricked and cheated and defrauded by this mind.
For when assumption, when assuming I have been assuming just to material form,
I have been assuming just to feeling, I have been assuming just to perception,
I have been assuming just to determinations, I have been assuming just to consciousness.
With my assumption as condition being comes to be, with being as condition birth,
with birth as condition aging in death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair come to be.
Such is the origin of this wholeness of suffering. I have confidence in Master Gautama,
thus, Master Gautama is capable of teaching me the Dhamma in such a way that I might rise up from
the seat cured of my blindness. Then Magandia, associate with true men. When you associate with true men,
you will hear the true Dhamma. When you hear the true Dhamma, you will practice in accordance with
the true Dhamma. When you practice in accordance with the true Dhamma, you will know and see for yourself
thus. These are diseases, tumors and darts, but here these diseases, tumors and darts cease without
remain there. With a cessation of my assumption comes cessation of being. With a cessation of being,
cessation of birth, cessation of birth, aging in death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief and despair
cease. Such is the cessation of the whole, this whole mass of suffering.
When this was said, the wonder of Magandia said, magnificent Master Gautama, magnificent.
Master Gautama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were returning upright
or had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was lost,
or holding up a lamp in the dark, for those with eyesight to see forms. I go to Master Gautama
for refuge, and to the Dhamma, and to the Sunday of Brookers. I would receive the going forth
under the Master Gautama, I would receive the full admission. Magandia, one who formerly belonged to
the other sect and desires the going forth and full admission in this Dhamma and discipline,
lives on probation for four months. At the end of the four months, if the Bikus are satisfied with
him, they give him the going forth and full admission to the Bikus state, but I recognise individual
differences in this matter. Renable Sir, if those who formerly belonged to another sect and desire
the going forth and full admission in this Dhamma and discipline, live on probation for four months,
and if at the end of the four months the Bikus being satisfied with them, give them the going forth
and full admission to the Bikus state, then I will live on probation for four years. At the end of
four years, the Bikus are satisfied with me, let them give me the going forth and full admission
to the Bikus state. Then the wanderer Magandia receives the going forth under the blessed one,
and he receives the full admission and soon not long after his full admission, dwelling alone,
withdrawn and diligent, ardent and resolute, the venerable Magandia by realizing for himself
with direct knowledge here and now, entered upon and abided in that supreme goal of the holy life,
for the sake of which Clansman rightly goes forth from the home life into homelessness.
He directly knew, the birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, but had to be done,
has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being, and the venerable Magandia became one
of the elements. I like the fact that he wasn't, you know, he was determined, he didn't really matter
if he went forth, but he was still going to do it, you know, listen to it, listen to take on the
Buddhist teaching, go forth, no matter how long it took. Because he doesn't know. Going forth
he's just got an external means, a statement, a livelihood and shown that, yeah, for somebody
he came and destroyed the dam, right there and then, yeah, he doesn't matter, four months, four years,
two months, two months, because he'll be doing the same thing, he'll be practicing the droward, renunciation,
dwelling resolute. He'll be a resident, yeah. Yeah, basically dwelling resolute.
One thing is to understand, but another thing is to stick to it, for as long as it is necessary,
for all of the assumptions and habits of desires to claim, for some people it will take longer,
for some people it will take shorter time, but without being reserved. But exactly, yeah,
the resolution needs to be there, obviously resolution is possible only once understanding
as a resident, if you know what you're supposed to be a resident, but, you know, the resolution
in the world will help you. But what about the strength, if you say never again? Yeah, sure.
But obviously, again, never again, might free, if they stick to it, might free people from
central desire, but it's still not necessarily, doesn't mean that they will have the right view
in terms of the dam and the ban, because the Buddha did say, even the Tuzuna can experience
dispassion in this caste in regard to sensuality. And in three, he himself from it,
but he can't free himself from other assumptions, assumptions of self, of conceit and so on.
But obviously, it would be much easier for somebody who is free from sensuality to then understand
the dam, then from somebody who isn't. Why? Because it's already kind of understood the principle
of assumption. It just needs to be pointed out that very fact, the Padana of sensual pressures
of craving has been obviously abandoned. So he needs to dwell on the nature of that abandonment
and then apply the same to the sense of self and his conceit and then he'll be in the barn.
And obviously, he can do that unless he's, somebody points that out to somebody who knows.
Yeah, Timi was a resolute means of it. You don't take,
you see the goal, you take nothing less than that, and that's what you're striving for.
Yeah, the solution can be basically, can take many forms. You can be a resolute for the rest of your life.
Any central pleasure that comes within the range of your senses, you will basically override
the vision of pain, and dark, and burning embers. Why? Because that's how they actually are.
You might not necessarily see that, but you took it off faith because the Buddha said it.
And if you keep applying it, because it is so, it will take its roots. And then you will see it,
so obviously you can take on faith wrong instruction and then no matter applying it,
it will result in seeing it clearly as such, because it's not as such. But sensuality is as such,
so you're kind of emulating seeing it as such, like overriding with your resolution,
will result to you eventually seeing it for what it is, as such.
So that's basically those people who practice some faith, they take on faith and they just stick to it.
Yes, it's been made pretty clear.
And I don't think, you know, if there is a resolution, if there is a restraint, if there is a
virtue established, I don't think it will take too long for one to start seeing that actually
they are painful. It won't be before too long before it becomes apparent that the pain
of restraint is not of restraint, but it's revealed by restraint and it's of the senses,
of the desire. That is the first point of contact, with sense, something like with the central
pleasure, the first point of contact is pain. Always, everything else, all the pleasure you
then get from giving into those desires is built on top of those burning embers, which means
they themselves are certainly not pleasant. Well, the rising essential pleasure, basically,
you can pin down on your assumption of, in regard to central pleasure, the assumption that
they are worthy and pleasant, which means you will pray for them. And craving for them will then
make them, make you regard them as even more pleasant and so on, for it will feed itself.
You stop craving for them, sensuality cannot arise. Agreeable beautiful objects in the world
will still arise, but they will not induce central desire.
So you recognize the sensuality, like beautiful sights, for example, are confined
to the domain of sight, to the eyes. And then there is essential desire to see something beautiful.
If you say no to it, you will experience pain, because that's what the desire is, pain.
And people don't experience pain, because their minds are already far out in the anticipation
of satisfaction of the desire. So they are already running, even before the dog started the
aching level. But all you have to do is just stop and the pain will arise. And then, as I said,
with some instruction and diligence and resolve it, but if you become apparent that
that pain, like bigger small sometimes, doesn't matter, it's the pain of the actual sensual touch.
It's the pain of craving, present, simultaneously, with the agreeable beautiful object in the world.
So then you remove the craving. And what you have is just beautiful objects in the world.
But no desire for them.
So seeing craving is pain, simultaneously. Exactly. And that brings you to the well-other approach,
the approach of four noble truths with Tanha, with craving, suffering is. So whenever there is pain,
there is craving. So if you suffer on account of sensuality, it's because you crave. And then
that's what sensuality is. Sensuality is craving for sensuality. As a whole, as a unit, that's what
sensuality is. Craving for sensuality, for pleasures derived through the sensuality.
That is sensuality. Thus you can rightly say sensuality is painful and unpleasant,
because you can't have sensuality, then, without the main component of craving for the sensuality.
So it's a semi-danger of craving. You see the pain, there is pain, there is suffering.
The danger of craving, basically, craving for pleasure derived from sensuality,
well, sensuality cannot be discerned if there are no operating functional, living healthy senses.
But that's something that's completely obscured, because as I said, the mind is already out there
with the actual pleasures, with the derived from it, which means you took everything that preceded
those pleasures, you took that to granted. You made it big. Bava is there, sensual being is there.
Your mind is far away from it, but dependent on it. So then, as I said, if your mind is fully dependent
on the pleasures derived by the sense-base and sense-objects, if something happens to sense-base
and sense-objects and something will happen, because they're not in your control, then the mind
will be cut away with it. That is what death is. Being swept with the floods,
let's sweep away your body, your five senses. So unless you climb down that tree,
those sensed trees on the safe ground, when they're taking down, you will crash with them.
So that is the danger, that's a real death, that's what death is. Death cannot touch you.
If your mind is withdrawn from the dependence on the pleasure of the senses.
So somebody, just all you have to do is just contemplate losing your ears,
you're losing your life. And then, like, say there is an imminent danger of death,
no amount of sense desire will override that. No matter how strong it was before, the fact that
the very next second, you might be dead, you will drop everything you will do, everything you want
to do, everything you will engage with. And most likely, a normal person will freak out.
Become religious. Because they only will become religious. Start praying to the divine providence
and develop a faith that everything will end up well for you. It's basically the whole purpose
of that. Again, it's the same. It emulates the principle of centrality. You will hit by the pain,
you cover it up with a pleasant desire. You will hit by the pain of non-central nature.
You cover it up with the assumptions of everything will be fine. Again, pleasure, peaceful, it's okay.
So, the whole purpose of human religiousness and superstition is a cover-up,
is just extension of centrality. Hence, it's another type of upadana, as the Buddha said.
See about the Parmas. Basically, belief, assuming, holding onto virtue, duties,
extension into religion and so on, holding onto views, assuming the views. That's also comes under it.
It was a good to know because the greatest of happiness, the most people, is a fully functional,
healthy, strong body that can take you around and get all those pages. That's like the peak.
Happiness, you can imagine. Which is simultaneously the peak of the danger.
It means that when you are dependent, you are blind. Like you are not aware of it,
because you are too far out with the expectations of pleasure. That's with the dependence in
its full highest swing. The person might start withdrawing from the central pleasures when
senses start failing. However, if you wait for your senses to start failing and then withdraw,
well, you are not withdrawing. You are being withdrawn. And then what you're going to have,
then you're going to have views and also assumptions based on that. Now, you cannot undo.
Because it's kind of too late, basically. Your dependence only has been 45.
That's the danger of all age, basically. I mean, theoretically, it's still possible to
approve it all and become an out of hand, but highly unlikely. Why? Because I mean,
the habit of dependence on the senses has been calculated manyfold. Much longer than for somebody
who has spent your 30 years old. Which means also to views and assumptions on top of that
have risen. And now the senses have declined and show your ability to kind of experience the
central pleasure has declined, but not the assumption of the pleasures of the senses.
That has stayed. And now you have no kind of reference point for that to undo it.
When your senses were still there, you could see a direct link, direct dependence.
On your assumptions upon the central pleasures and everything else and the actual operating senses.
But now the senses are gone and you're so oblivious in regard to them ignorant, deluded,
indolent. It's virtually impossible. Here, I think it's possible, but highly unlikely.
So, the longer you wait, as the Buddha said, actually, that's okay. You just read it.
The longer you engage with sensuality, the stronger it gets.
The more dependent upon it, you become. It means more painful, it will be saying no to it.
Or rather, the greater pain will be revealed by saying no to it. And mine cannot take the pain.
Untrained mind cannot take the pain. And what will untrained mind, which cannot take the pain,
do? Try to avoid the pain, but it only means that it knows. Means of sensuality.
So, you end up revolving around that, which causes you pain. You're using that to avoid that pain.
Think about it, you can win yourself off of sensual pain.
No, you can't do that either.
But just a little bit. I used to have a lot of it.
As the Buddha said, in regard to the being, and there is a being of sensual pleasures as well,
he said, basically, that as much as a large lump of extremance instincts,
even the small bits of extremance share the same stink, same foul smell,
same goes for the being of any kind, same goes for sensuality. So,
winning yourself off extremance with little extremance is no meaning of self of extremance smell at all.
The extremance smell is the present. It doesn't matter the amount of it.
How big the lump is.
So, for example, about some of these, doing something innocence, you know, well,
not so bad. That's still a distraction. Watching movies, watching movies, distracting yourself.
So, it's not a horrible thing. You're watching action movies or whatever.
And then, the person says, okay, well, that's distracting. That's got nothing to do with
Dumma. That's got nothing to do with her life. Therefore, I will watch something with,
we've got a, you know, connected to Dumma. Dumma movie.
Well, there is no such thing. But then I will connect it to old age and death,
never I'm winning myself off.
Yeah, but see the point is, you turn a blind eye to the fact that the purpose of a movie is,
sorry, the purpose of the movies in general is entertainment. It's distraction. It's taking
your mind away. And that taking your mind away, it's nothing other than moha, the delusion,
the indolence of the mind. As I was saying yesterday, delusion is, it's not a kind of a hidden secret
truth that you're not aware of. You're deluded, you know, delusion is an attitude of mind
in the same sense, anger is and lust is. That's why it's lust, aversion and delusion.
So, sure, you might watch a Dumma movie that does not have the explicit sensuality,
provocativeness and so on. But the fact is that you're engaging in the indolence of mind,
why you let your mind go over the movies, let the story unfold, take your mind on a ride,
which is not necessarily sensual ride, but it's the ride of the vision, the ride of indolence,
which is basically that which is kind of underlying both, lust and anger.
Your mind is never indolent, it cannot give in to lust nor anger.
But if you're practicing delusion, basically, if you're practicing indolence,
means you remain liable to lust, you remain accessible to lust, lust remains possible.
So, sure, you can watch all sorts of documentaries and informative movies and whatever else,
the fact is your mind goes in the state of indolence, which means when the lust comes,
you will not be fortified in regard to it.
So, there is no excuse for it.
It's a non-indolence. If you remain non-indolent, you will not give in to any distraction,
no matter how informative, inverted, comma, this, because Dharma is to be known individually,
internally, by the wise, not on a big screen.
And even if this is the movie about the Buddha's life, again, it could be watched as distraction.
Because the only way to remain mindful of the movie is to basically not give in all of it,
and that means why watch it in the first place.
Same like reading novels or books of any kind,
to the man to take the mind away.
It's not as bad as, you know, full-on pursuit of sensuality in a binging manner,
but it's certainly maintaining the indolence of the mind,
maintaining the delusion, maintaining the ignoring of the nature of Venus.
And that's an important point, because many people still have notions and assumptions
that delusion, and even Avija, it's kind of, you know, this metaphysical ignorance
that is then revealed by some extraordinary transcendental experience.
It's not. It's the, it's something you engage most often.
More often than sensuality, more often than anger.
That's what Avija is. That's what delusion is.
It's indolence of the mind.
It's, it's, it's a muddleness, black clarity.
And that you maintain that. People maintain that.
You maintain it through sensuality, you maintain it through anger,
you maintain it through ignorance choices, you maintain it through distraction and dependence on distraction.
That's why you remove a distraction from, well,
remove all of the distractions from a normal person out there in the world,
and they'll, they'll freak out.
The border will start creeping in, and then the border will reveal a peril behind it.
A real genuine fear of, and threat, a real genuine threat of sinking into your own mind,
and drowning there, going man basically.
So, quickly, provide with some distractions, give me something to do.
You know, it's devoted to weightiness, it's saying.
Yeah.
Which is, it sounds nice, like, you know, but it's quite a heavy thing to do.
It's a heavy thing to do initially, but until you, until you still have the,
the pull of the senses and so on, it feels like a heavy word, but it is, it is a heavy word initially.
As we spoke in, was a couple of days ago, like a, like a, like a herdsman looking after the cow.
While the cows are still wild and unrestrained, it's going to be a lot of work to keep
them away from the heavy fields, from eating other people's crops.
But once they are tamed and come down, then it's just pure pleasure.
You just sit, you don't even have to move.
They'll listen to you.
They don't go.
So, yeah, initially for a person who never practiced weightfulness,
it's going to be the hardest task in the world.
Because it's devoted to weightfulness means less sleep.
Means less sleep even when you're awake.
Yeah, that means less distractions means, means not resting mentally.
It doesn't mean you're full engaging constant effort,
but means you're engaged in non-resting, like the similar of a, of a cow.
But if it sits down, it's being eaten by the animals, devoured by the animals that live on the ground.
If it leans, something stands up and leans, if something's devoured by the animals that,
that live on the trees that it leans and so on.
So basically, no position of the mind you give in to that kind of,
just the rest of five minutes.
You can rest your body only once.
Let me shut it. But mind is exactly, no shut enough.
Why? Because actually, shutting off, it's not necessary.
That's why delusion, it's a habit.
A Vigia is a habit that's being maintained through a Vigia.
Ignorance is determined by ignorance.
And the Buddha said that, and the Vira mentions as well.
So the point is, once the mind is straining weightfulness,
weightfulness is effortless.
And then it ceases to be a chore.
It becomes a very pleasant place for a body. It becomes nibana.
Well, as long as a Vigia is not entirely approved, exactly, a Vigia will try to maintain itself.
So in the same sense, basically, that a person sees danger in centrality,
sees it as burning embers, so should the indolence of the mind be seen as well,
non-weightfulness. And that is, the Buddha said, the ones who are not mindful
are already as dead.
So living is quite difficult, we are living in it.
Real living is a full-time task.
I had, again, what Nabila said.
It's not some life, it's not something you just float and fly over and go through,
it becomes actually a full-time task.
Even for the one who is not necessarily crazy for a lunch, it just wants to live authentically,
wants to live responsibly, wants to live mindfully.
Because it is that, anyway, like if a Patujana, a Sutta, a Patujana,
are instructed without any regard, it's also a task, it's even worse, because he's making
it worse through ignoring it. He's making his itch worse through constantly scratching it.
He's making more powerful each time, which means each time you'll need to work even harder.
You can never have too much of mindfulness, and if you have too much of anything else,
mindfulness will even eat out, if mindfulness is established.
Clarity of the mind, non-modernness, so to speak, clear thinking,
and restraint of the senses.
Then even a very little of the instruction from the Sutta's and the Buddha will be required,
because the ground is very fertile, set up. Everything is there, ready, in the right order.
Purify, then you need very little instruction to fix it up,
once and for all.
