I was listening briefly this morning, the talk, learning how to feel, that one that you
did some time ago, I don't know, kind of more recent.
Anyway, in the beginning of it, you were talking about these ideas as like, for example,
you go into the village and you establish your mind, perceptions of the forest, you know,
affected by anything in the village, but I found it difficult to understand that when
I tried to think of what does that mean, or it did this time as well, imagining myself
in a forest.
Yeah, because you were not actually in the forest, that's, you couldn't have established
your, well, if you were in the forest and you might go to establish your own perception
of the forests, then you could quite likely be able to establish yourself still upon those
perceptions, even when you cease to be in the forest, but if you haven't been in the forest
and if you haven't established your mind upon the perceptions of the forest, then obviously
can't do that.
It would remain on the level of abstraction.
And the reason why perceptions of the forest, well, in that subter, it's because what
is the main difference between a remote wilderness forest and village?
What would be the main difference?
No, people, absence of people, absence of others, just like the main characteristic of
the, if you establish your mind upon the perceptions of the forest, means no others.
And then you stay established upon that perception when you go among others.
And if you remain established, obviously, then nothing that comes from others can invade
you.
I suppose I'm not understanding how one can remain established on the perception of
no people when there are people.
Yeah, well, the mind can, because people already implies absence of them as a possibility.
When you actually went into the actual experience of that possibility of absence of people, you
kind of had it validated, you've been dwelling in, you've been living in, you go used to it,
you started discerning signs and tokens of such perceptions.
Then you go among people, and you remain established upon the complete counterfeit absence
of people.
So you don't have to go to the forest to become another one, but it is certainly quite
a suitable way to develop a mind, which is why the Buddha was so encouraging about it.
And there was the purpose as well, forest means no others.
You don't run away from them because they bother you, you feed them or ever know.
You go there to develop such perceptions, so that then when you surround them by people,
you want to make a difference.
Some of the people use this for the forest because they don't want to deal with anything,
so they feel like only I run away, but it is nothing to deal with, with others, more
than others, although it would be great, but that's probably the wrong basis for doing
such thing.
So the perceptions we're referring to is like how it is that I know that I am in a forest,
as opposed to how I know I am in a city, which is namely the absence of various things
in the forest.
But then, so maybe the confused and I was like, what does it mean to establish the mind
on that reception?
I think that I was talking that in a talk where the mind is not established, then it's
an abstraction.
If the mind actually matches the level of that phenomenon, then it's easy to be abstraction,
and that's where the mind is established upon it, upon such notions.
So I'll have to definitely revisit that talk.
It's just not really clicking through how you're going to have establishments of perceptions
of something that is not directly present, being perceived, but that's the thing, as
I said, perceptions that tend to the senses, but also to the mind, thoughts of being perceived,
the sixth sense, mono, and it's counterpart, thumb, images.
So that's the main point.
So some perceptions that you have, like your eyes, ears, nose, you start discerning more
general perceptions, possibilities of such perceptions, and so on, which are all obviously
on the level of the mind.
That's why it's the establishment of the mind, not the establishment of the eye or
the ear.
And that's the main thing.
So absence of people, it's almost present on the level of mind when you're looking at
people, when you're surrounded by people, when you're eyes see people, as a remote possibility
to that which is on the mental level, it's the absence of these very people.
And that's where the mind gets established.
So that's how you can look at people while the mind is established on the counterpart
of the absence of people.
You're not denying that they're not real, they're very real, but the mind does not descend
on the level of the eye.
It stays established upon the images, perceptions, then it has developed while in the forest.
And then it recognizes as in that sutra, now while I'm established, while upon these
perceptions of the forest, I can't be bothered by anything in the village.
But I can be bothered by changes in the forest.
So then he expands that, and then he establishes his mind upon the phenomenon of earth, an
element of earth.
Because again, element of earth as a remote descend, possibility is present in everything.
And the mind stays on that while the experience kind of descends down on the more particular
eye levels.
So it's been quite a little more there, perhaps the separation that I think is important
to clarify is what is the difference.
Let's stay with the forest in versus the town for sure being.
So I'm in town trying to add on perceptions of the forest.
What's the separation between that and just kind of like not paying attention to daydream
in that I'm in the woods?
Well, that's when the mind ceases to be established, and then it becomes just daydream of being
in the woods.
So it's in a matter of, at that moment, time might be attending to the woods in a particular
kind of way instead of attending.
If the mind is established, then you're properly attending to the perceptions of the absence
of people in the woods.
If the mind is not then, yeah, then it's just fantasy.
And then you won't be establishment and then you will not be impenetrable by the things,
perceptions that occur in the city of the village.
So that's when the mind, like you can still be kind of revolving on the same mental images,
but the mind is not developed in regard to them.
It's not established in regard to them.
The mind has descended down where the eye is, where the ear is, nose and so on.
The idea of having the mind on a quote unquote higher level made a little bit more sense
to me, the idea that you can be, you know, talking to people while at the same time the
mind doesn't necessarily have to get disturbed, yeah, disturbed by that.
It's not an easy thing, but it's never going to stay for him, not at all.
And that's what my development is in the sutras, samadhi, and all the other level here,
establishes my perception of light, infinite space.
It's exactly that.
You can just take it to various degrees, all the way up to the cessation of perception
and feelings.
So, the same kind of establishment goes into play with, like, you know, you just mentioned
perception of light, which is typically, you know, the end to the third end doing soft
torpor.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So, it's kind of the same idea you're saying of establishing the mind on a perception of
light.
We're talking about light in terms of light, light, bold light.
Light.
A phenomenon of light.
It's in day, which is in the dark, as the absence, which is in the light bulb, where I can't
light.
That's the thing.
It's not a particular object that emits light.
It's not staring into a light bulb.
No.
No, is it staring at the play disks to establish the mind upon the element of a light, which
is what people do, to consider the pucks.
I understand that there is a phenomenon of light that emits light, absence of light, but
it's still a one-round light.
Yeah.
It's establishing the mind on that the same way that overcome sleepiness, somehow.
Sure.
Or to not own sleepiness, not without sleepiness, because sometimes the body might be genuinely
sleeping.
But obviously, if you take it up, then it becomes your sloth and torpor, but if it's not
then it's just the body start.
And then you might actually stay awake, because you realize what it is, or you might sleep
a very little.
Or you might sleep a lot if the body was really tired, but you won't be sleeping out of indulgence
in that sleep, and indulges in that ignorance, because the mind remains established.
Right.
We're about unattractiveness, perception, interaction, looking at the practice of 32 parts
of the body, and the perspective of the body.
Which takes away lust.
Yeah.
So you're not running on the aspect of beauty?
You think so?
So it's the same thing.
It's the same body, same thing.
That can be regarded in a manner of infatuation, with lust, or can be seen as actually quite
impulsive.
But because people have an inherent assumption of the value of pleasure, you just always
automatically give your attention to the beautiful aspect of it, and you don't want to think
about what it being caused.
Gross.
It's not, it's not nice.
And that's what the last develops, right?
So over the point, it's not just the stare at corpses or bodily organs for themselves.
The point is to see those very things as things that you do regard as beautiful.
So simultaneously, to see them as beautiful, these other things, and that will undermine
the notion of beautiful, that usually grips the people's mind.
To remind, we have always said that the dimension of the other mind is quite, I think, called
the master perceptions.
Like you can see that beautiful in the mirror.
Not really.
Not really in beautiful sense.
Yeah.
It realizes that the potential for the perception is all in the zombies, which is a matter
of which one is intended to.
Because that's exactly the point, like in beautiful, there is the underlying ugly, because
you can be regarded as a possibility of an ocean of ugly.
And same, ugly can be regarded as beautiful in reference to something else.
It's just that people's mind get gripped by the notion of beauty and loves to immediately
invade it and spread it further.
For an hour on, it's free from lust, heal him up.
This is a beautiful object that he can see through as ugly.
This is an ugly object that he can see through as beautiful.
Either way, there won't be only lust in between the two of them in regard to it, but it's
on a different level, I think.
Yes, yes, yes, me if I'm wrong.
Yeah, absolutely.
It's not.
Like, when there is beautiful, ugly is on the level of a possibility on it, which means
it's more general.
When it's ugly, its beauty is on the level of possibility.
There is a single tenuous present.
That's why the mind can be developed in regard to both, making the peripheral more present.
Discerning the peripheral, while discerning the peripheral of the general ugliness, repulsiveness
in regard to this particular beautiful thing that has a reason.
I think there is another source, which is more ugly for beautiful world, doesn't it?
Well anyway, I think you can infer that by yourself, if you just, as a whole, the world
as a whole, you experience as a whole, if you look at it, you'll see, well, there are
more ugly things, the more things that you don't want to look at.
And then you know that we've always been selectively picking these particular things that we
found beautiful.
So ugly, but being more general, we'll always remain like a foundation for the beautiful.
You know, you have to do is remove the last thing in regard to beautiful, and then that
relationship becomes apparent.
And then you, you know, you won't have to be staring at ugly things to remove your
last thing, because you never removed it, you removed it in regard to beautiful things.
So then it's just, if it's ugly, you know, it's ugly, it's beautiful, you know, it's
beautiful.
But again, there is no last thing in regard to it, because you know, within that, it's
actually quite repulsive.
Nothing is worth being lasted after.
Do you have to intention to find the subtracted aspect?
Well, the tetralation, yeah, yeah, because by giving in to the last thought, it's beautiful,
you automatically maintain ignorance, ignoring of the other.
Because if, if ugly in the beautiful are given at the same time, yeah, you will be repelled
by both.
So in terms of 30 points, he reviews his body from the totally negative souls of his people.
Each, each part he reviews, he reviews it in relationship to the general notion of body.
There is regard of his mind, there is regard of his beautiful, his strong, his healthy,
his everlasting, and whatever else.
He doesn't go through like systematically just listing organs for the sacred, listing
organs.
So when he's thinking about the organ of the eye, ear, nose, skin, nails, each of them individually,
he thinks in relationship to the body as a whole.
Why is it ugly?
Which, what do you mean?
Well, it's ugly because it's intolerant.
Yeah.
That's why it's ugly.
That's why it's ugly.
That's why it's ugly.
Yeah.
It's ugly.
This is.
Insult of it.
No, no, no.
Lost it after.
It's not mine.
It's.
It's not mine, yeah.
It's ugly.
So you think it's not much, so much amount of liver is nasty looking, but it's just not
accessible.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Exactly.
Exactly.
And that's usually what a person would get when he encounters something ugly, something
repulsive.
Oh, I don't want this.
So you start looking at the liver, at the brain, as I don't want this in relation to
that notion of the body as a general thing.
Oh, there.
And that's often the problem that people would get with a super practice in meditation.
It would be in the beginning.
They might see the relationship between every individual part or a dead body or anything
that they're practicing.
There's a contemplation.
They might maintain the mindful relationship between the sense of their body, but that tends
to kind of fall out, fall away, and then it's a sense of like trying to revoke disgust
for the sake of disgust.
But that's equally, can be equally misleading.
I'm trying to think about a pretty girl and they're like, oh, she's made of organs.
Yeah.
Yeah.
She is, but that's the thing.
But you want to see actually that even you seeing the pretty girl, that which kind
of precedes the sight of the pretty girl, is made of those unwanted and accessible,
disgusting organs.
And then there won't be any ground left for lust to kind of linger on.
Neither in regard to the scene, nor in regard to that because of which there is scene.
Which is a presence of this conscious body here.
It comes back to preceding existence, structurally preceding it.
And it's helped by understanding that lust becomes impossible.
Not knowing that, that's the best for lust.
That's when you refer to parasite.
It's not supposed to be there, but it's there.
It's been a few minutes because when I first started reading the bosom, you know, there's
that one sutra, I think, Munchen and the Kaya, 119, if you're into the mindless of body
sutra.
Uh-huh.
Talks about how you could use mindless body to even attain the bondage.
I'm like, how could you do that one about the mind when you think about the body in this
kind of way that we're speaking?
Yeah.
It makes perfect sense.
Absolutely.
Yeah.
And that's why we were meant.
It's called universe.
It's contained in this body.
Not in the scientific body, main of organ, but in this notion of body, this experience
of body, which does precede things that I kind of infer from it, the world and the
end of the world.
Yeah.
Is it you guys after the thirty-five somebody to expect the cork sensation in that same
sutra by telling my time in the area?
And, you know, you look at a body wrunching in various stages and then one says, you think
yourself just that body is the same, this body will be the same, this body, just my
body, this body will be the same.
And there's a bridge that can seem to be as opposed to looking at the body parts.
So what does that come down to?
While you're looking at a decomposing body, you simultaneously regard this body as that.
What is the level of a mental exercise in parents or so on, but basically by seeing, while
I'm seeing this, this is that nature.
This body shares that very nature and then the last is removed.
But if it's not seen at the simultaneous level, so to speak, then it's not done properly.
That contemplation.
So the external body that's decomposing, it's basically the nature that is the nature
of this which I regard as my internal body.
That's the internal body, basically like that external body.
That's where it's internal external, both internal and external.
The body is there of such nature and you remove any, well, ignorance in regard to it
and consequently, obviously, these are in the last, they would be lingering around the
notion of pleasant and the beauty.
And you're saying these are in the last, you mean that, like in the most broad sense?
In the most natural sense.
Not exactly in the last, yeah, just like people have these are in the last in regard to
their own body because they pursue side sounds, melt their touches, which means you maintain
the basis of those things, which is your very body, your senses.
Because those things are on fire as well.
Everything is caught up by the fire on lust.
And that's why because you depend on the beautiful sights, your life revolves around it,
you'll be terrified of the notion of losing your eyes, you'll figure out if I go blind.
And it equals death, you think about the diseases, you can have, yeah, different things that
could come into your way at any point.
Just the fact that those things are possible means the body is liable at any time.
The fact that the body is liable at any time means you're not in control because if you're
in charge, you would remove death liable.
Only something that you cannot control, you cannot own is liable to things you don't want.
That's it's not yours for that very reason.
But people don't dwell long enough on what body is liable to, to age, get sick and die
because if they were, they would experience the special regard here and then the special.
Oh, it's dangerous for me to remain regarded, this is mine.
And like kind of establishing my entire life around it can be swept away with a simple illness
next day.
And that's it.
Falling bolted.
Falling bolted?
Okay.
Trip over a rock.
Beating by a snake.
Everything.
Everything.
Every heart stop.
For no particular reason.
And that's how it looked like.
There you go.
Many people start experiencing anxiety, attacks, whatever they become aware of that, beating
up.
And the chest.
Because you realize your entire life, everything, dear to you, all your hopes, plans, experiences,
whatever, depends on this completely independent, simple muscle pump inside your chest.
You have absolutely no way of even controlling, contributing and just going to get involved.
And if that stops pumping, that's it, everything is done, it's kind of swept away with it.
So your whole life depends on something utterly, like a ticking organ, and you can't even
conceive controlling.
You have these videos of mine sometimes where a person's like an event or talking, something
to kill over.
It's brain enders.
No.
Same thing.
Yeah, it's like the brain basically explodes, it's just done, it's blood, it's something
to blood.
And that's the nature of the body in general.
I mean, we know because of the medical science that, you know, the heart is the kind of dominant
pump that maintains it and so on, but overall, it's the nature of any aspect of the body.
It's hard to control.
It's on the same foot.
So what do you regard the heart?
That's the unattractiveness.
You know, what do you regard the heart, contemplate the heart, the brain, or the body as a whole
in general, or just the notion of health and life as a phenomenon?
It's all the same thing.
It's the same contemplation.
It's you're even moving by simply dwelling in the fact that you cannot be in control even
if you want, which means it's not even possible to be in control of this, left alone after
you're in control of it.
So there's just some practices.
I think we'll have a chance to say to one more, keep these pieces in a jar when you're
thinking about it's broken, that hurt.
You want to just worry about the child, but it's not this, which, you know, can be helpful
with that person at the time, but that can seem to be practice, where you think about
the stink, where there's an experiment, and really, those things which genuinely most
you'll find, you've probably seen it, that's another level of the fact of non-control,
rather than...
Well, if a super is done rightly, it could lead to the dispassion which will become, and
then they will reveal the novel, because it's really not in my control.
So a super done rightly brings the clarity, and clarity of understanding, which is understanding
that you're not in control.
Not the discussed.
Not discussed, and not like, oh, you do a super when you need to cancel the last, but
you need to cancel the last, because you haven't included the last.
So you don't want to revolve around just constantly managing the last, when the last arises.
Sure, when the last arises, you manage it, only so that you can then carry on further
and uproot it, so it doesn't arise.
And if a super is done rightly, it will really lead to accruting it, but most people use
it just as a management, and which means they're not using it right here.
It's just like, yeah, they are there, we saw the bones, the meat, the meaty bones, the
carnage, and then you get a sign of that meaty carnage, yes, the meaty bones, yeah, carnage.
And I'm saying, it looks like just put you by a road accident, which is destroyed, shattering,
and that's what this body is, that's what dog body is, that's what I was worried about,
yeah.
This joint is flesh.
Yeah, that's it.
So because of that, there is, as a sort of say, the conceiver and the perceiver, there
is the mistake, because these things are reason, the senses, the sense organs, are the material
things in the world, because of which one perceives and conceives the world, because obviously
one perceives and thus conceives the demons, with non-desermot, with appropriation.
So you can never, that perceiver and conceiver, can never access, well, anything but them,
but most obviously cannot access any of the sense bases, because the sense bases are
that, because of which there are side sounds from out there's touches, and then thoughts
in regard to that.
So you can't see, your eye can't see itself as that meaty, fleshy, oily, slimy, order,
become.
That's why by seeing other eyes, or other organs, or other material things on the same domain
as not yours, you can then discern that this, which is similar to Mr. President, cannot
be seen in the same manner, because it's always, in that sense it's always internal, or
rather in that sense it's always this conscious body, where you can fully discern that it
shares the same nature, and thus remove any lust and desire and appropriation in regard
to it.
But if you expect to see it as side sounds from out there starting, you want it, as if
people get confused, with kind of salient in general, because they're always, in a way,
they're negative, they can only be discerned in regard to the things that are positively
arisen.
Like you can see something and know the eye must be there, exactly, simultaneous with the
sight.
And even the knowledge of the eye is simultaneous with the domain, the knowledge of the domain
of the sight.
There's no time discrepancy, as if sense bases are there, and then things fall onto
them and you'll perceive it, no.
You mean perception of forest, as well, if you haven't, you would have to be in a forest
as well.
Yeah.
Because if you haven't, then you stay in a forest, and develop perceptions over forest.
And you don't actually do that up more often, those perceptions become clear.
That's why I put it here.
Go to the remote land, go to the forest, go to the woods, the trees, and so on.
No others.
Yeah.
Because we're actually physically making that effort.
You're putting yourself in such environment, a circumstance that with these perceptions,
the mind will, well, adhere to them, eventually.
Maybe not the first time, but if you know what you're supposed to look, what do, what signs,
natural dispassion, inception around it, then the mind starts discerning, the perceptions
of the forest, the perceptions of absence of people, absence of the common bases of
lust, absence of the sense of abundance, sense of objective abundance, that they lie for,
pleasing food, face, mouth, the absence of all of them, things that people usually lust
after, absence of that, you won't find that in abundance.
It was somebody who could go into wilderness, and the mind stayed in the city.
Yeah.
Well, that's the carefulness, the carefulness that comes from living in the forest, the attitude
of being really careful about what you know, what you're just becoming natural.
Because you're real, like, if you make a wrong step, you'd have to fly down the cliff,
like when we were coming down the cliff, you didn't have to make the effort, like this
mindfulness.
You were just mindful, you just, every move, everything you leaned on, everything you
grabbed, everything you put a foot on, you were just mindful, because you had to be.
You are aware of your body, and the, the afflictions of your body, the basic, you have to
grab food, shelter, certain warmth, health, nothing.
Exactly.
And see, there are those things that most often people take for granted.
If we weren't taking for granted, you don't want to have to go to the remote forest and
climb the mountains and so on.
But it's so deeply rooted, it's so natural to take these things for granted once you
have them.
Then, yeah, you need these reminders to realize that actually, body, even a healthy, normal
body requires a great deal of maintenance and protection and sheltering, which is actually
a hard work.
But obviously, living inside the city, the cities where these things are provided, you
just take for granted because you don't think about it.
All you have to do is just remove yourself and that's it, and then you realize what kind
of maintenance it is.
How exposed the body is, even it's, you know, even when it's at its peak, it's better
still exposed, exposed to elements, exposed to energy.
And you can't say, you can't shelter them, you can't build a house around it, because
the house too is out on their level.
What other the body is out with their dead houses as well.
So it's just remains external, remains liable to all sorts of things.
And you can't change that.
You're right looking, you're speaking, but living in the house and sticking with your
father and so on.
There is a suitor, so I don't know, that's about this morning, about the forest.
Uh-huh.
Uh-huh.
Venable Nagita.
Welcome, crossing.
It's, there's two suitors about Venable Nagita, and he's, in the ungood to me today.
This is the one from the Sixers.
They're both summoning in the beginning, but different teachings, and there's slightly
different teachings.
This is the one in terms of the forest.
Yeah, that's, yeah.
I was reading.
Yeah.
So, uh, one occasion of last month was one doing one tour around the coast and together
with a large Sunday, and then you reach the coast and ramen village, uh, named Ichon
Nangala.
How does it call it?
Gala.
Ichon Nangala.
J.
The message went well in Ichon Nangala, uh, wooden thicket in the forest there.
The brown householders there heard it.
He said that they set a goat's mind, the son of the succulents who went forth from the
second family has arrived at this town.
There's not running in there, and the forest in the vine.
Now, a good report about the most, uh, master goat's mind has circulated thus.
That best one is at our end, perfectly enlightened.
These teachings, the Dhamma, the teachers of Dhamma is going to be getting good in the
middle and good in the end.
The right meaning and phrase of the reveals is spiritual life that is perfectly complete
and pure.
Now, it's good to see such a round.
Then with the mighty pass, the brown householders of their town took abundant food of various
kinds and went to the forest.
They stood outside the entrance, making an uproar and a racket.
Now, on that occasion, the Renable Marbita was the best one's attended.
The best one then addressed the Renable Marbita, who is making such an uproar and a racket
Marbita.
One would think it was a fishman at a whole with fish.
There's a bunch of these are the brown householders of Ichananagaya, who have brought abundant
food of various kinds.
They are standing outside the entrance, wishing to offer it to the best one and the
Sangha of Bikres.
Let me never come upon Fain Marbita and may Fain never catch up with me.
One who does not gain any will without trouble or difficulty, this bliss of renunciation,
bliss of solitude, bliss of peace, bliss of enlightenment that I gain in will without
trouble or difficulty, might accept that mild pleasure, that slothful pleasure, that pleasure
of gain, upon it, in praise.
And may he do it lies, let the best one now consent about it, let the fortune of one
consent.
This is the time for the best one to consent.
Wherever the best one will go now, the brown householders of town and countryside will
decline in the same direction, just as when thick drops of rain are pouring down, the water
flows down a lot of the slope.
So too, wherever the best one will go now, the brown householders of town and country
will be fine in the same direction for what reason, because of the best one's virtuous
behaviour in the wisdom and the will and the keep repeats.
Let me never come upon Fain Marbita, he's not consenting, may he never catch up with
me.
And he goes on to say, here in my Gita, I see a Bikres, dwelling on the outskirts of
a village, sitting in a state of compulsion.
And then it goes to me, now the monastery attendant, who are novice, who are co-religious
in this co-religious, will cause that vulnerable one to fall away from that compulsion.
For this reason, I'm not pleased with this Bikres dwelling on the outskirts of a village.
I see Navita, a forest dwelling Bikres, sitting in dozing in the forest, and then it goes
to me.
Now this venable one will dispel the sleepiness of the tea and attend only to the perception
of the forest, the state of the wonders.
For this reason, I'm pleased with this Bikres dwelling on the outskirts of a village.
Compose near the village with a client, because he's near the environment that is basically
prudent.
Non-compose sleep, he draws a lazy, but in the forest, well, eventually come out of
that sleep, he draws a lazyness, and then develop a proper perception of the forest, because
he still remains physically in the better environment.
The state of wonders.
Well, the state of wonders, basically, when the mind is established upon a more general
thing, it's not diversified among more particular things that you get in the village.
So it's a state of wonders in relation to that, and not the state of wonders that a tree
hugging does and might consider uniformity.
Yeah.
Yes, actually.
Yeah, exactly.
It's not diversified.
I see my Gita, a forest dwell in Bikres, sitting in the forest in that uncomposed state, and
then it goes to me.
Now this venable one will compose his uncomposed mind or guide his composed mind.
For this reason, I'm pleased with this Bikres dwelling in the forest.
I see my Gita a forest dwell in Bikres, sitting in the forest in a state of composure, and then
it goes to me.
Now this venable one will liberate his un liberated mind or guide his liberated mind.
For this reason, I'm pleased with this Bikres dwelling in the forest.
I see my Gita a Bikres dwelling on the outskirts of the village, who gained ropes, arms with
lodgings, medicines, provisions for the sick, desiring gain, honour and fame.
He neglects seclusion, he neglects remote lodgings in the forest and general pros, having entered
the village's towns and capital cities he takes up his residence.
For this reason, I'm not pleased with the Bikres dwelling in the outskirts of the village.
I see my Gita a forest dwell in Bikres, who gained ropes, arms with lodgings, medicines and
provisions for the sick, having dispelled that gain, honour and praise.
There's not neglect seclusion, there's not neglects remote lodgings in the forest and general
pros.
For this reason, I'm pleased with this Bikres dwelling in the forest.
When my Gita, I'm travelling on a highway and do not see anyone ahead of me or behind
me, even if it is for the purpose of defecating and urinating, on that occasion, I am at ease.
It's a praising forest.
You're making the effort, there's not neglecting it, and then even if it's not perfect,
even if a person is sleepy and lazy and tired or afraid, still, you still don't neglect it.
Sooner or later, you come out there, and the environment is suitable as it is spoken
in the previous.
It's a great template.
Yeah, it's basically, let's say, he goes into an empty heart, empty dwellings as this place
is empty of others, and then he accepts the same phenomena than he applies to himself.
This is empty of any self, so it's there as such, but it's empty of the owner.
But you do need that physical incentive, so to speak.
Your body needs to be such an environment, so you can have the right inference, not just
like to think about it, but never abandon a crowd, or never abandon the proximity of the
crowd.
The engagement, the dependence, the relationship.
Obviously, you know, you're not supposed to, and you don't have to, like, run away
and hide from people and never see them again, because if they were the case, well,
we would be allowed to stay around full-crow, around full, a little bit of a mountain,
and never engage because they did that.
But it was clear that no, living on the fringe and the outskirts, and then inspiring them,
either with your lifestyle, or with the teachings, if they want to hear them, and so on,
it's fine.
But don't neglect the seclusion.
Don't now, like, forget the remote forest of boats, and just 24-7 stay around late people.
That's what means village, laylife, city, today, whatever.
So, when it's there, if it occurs, it's fine, but you don't neglect the campfire.
And you can see that for yourself.
The more you go to the forest properly, the more you want to go.
The longer you want to stay, because of that, that the template.
Which is, yeah, as you say, dangerous, as well.
Sure?
Yeah?
There is a real danger there.
But I think the body is what's dangerous, not being in the forest.
The only reason things in the forest might be dangerous, like the elephant, or a leopard,
is because you have a body.
And the danger will only pertain to you, as long as you're taking the body to be yours.
So, experiencing the elements, heat, cold, wind, hardship, endurance, walking up the mountain,
climbing up the rocks, and running away from an elephant.
But not having.
Experiencing those things, basically, with the right mind from this, just keeps hammering in,
that the nature, the main characteristic of having this body, exposure,
not yours, not in your control, it's out there.
So, by going through with it, with the right mind from this, with the right view,
you're removing any lingering lust, and the emotions of conceit,
or bend it in regard to the body.
Even, you know, even if you're not an old crooked man, something like that, you don't have to be.
And actually, yeah, if you wait until you're old and crooked, you go back and you want it.
You go while you can, so that afterwards, you can.
Don't delay.
Yeah, it's set up, the forest, you might be set up in my distraction.
But it's not set up, yeah.
That's the ultimate sort of difference.
If you were to boil it down, there would be a difference, yeah.
Distraction, non-distraction, diversify, unify.
Again, that mosquito is a treat for it, there's no personal thing against you.
Yeah, there's no personality, no interaction.
You can put it on the mosquito, it's out to get you, but you know.
It's not, it's not.
Completely up and down.
Impersonal.
Impersonal.
Indifferent.
Leaches.
Yeah.
It comes back also, that idea that people's mind is going to fatalism with karma.
Again, anything happens because of karma.
Yeah, every single body.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Having a human body happens because of karma.
Yeah.
But what happens is that a human body, well, is a nature of a human body.
So indirectly, you're responsible to what happens to a human body because you were reborn.
That's your responsibility.
But accident is a valid reason for things to occur, circumstance.
You're again, indirectly responsible, why?
Because you remain in the possession of that human body.
That is liable to accidents, reliable to absolutely random things happening to it.
So you'll be affected by that for as long as you stay there.
You reign it, it doesn't affect you, you're a problem.
