Well, I'll start off with this one. The question is quite common. How to make sati continuous.
You know how to be mindful of the right thing continuously. You're speaking with yesterday.
Yeah, well simple answer is by understanding what sati is. By abandoning the notion that sati
tends to do that momentary momentary moment to moment awareness or something and there's simply contradiction. It doesn't, you can't exist like that.
But I'm interested in the sati which is in regard to freedom of suffering. Right? The relevant.
Not sati to make my life better. Yeah. To make them more productive or smarter, more intelligent, more focused.
Well, not even, not necessarily just that, but even like even people who are into meditation techniques and so on.
The idea of sati is that observing for a moment to a moment to a moment and then you have the uninterrupted mindfulness.
But mindfulness is not structured moment to moment, structurally in a different heart after all of more general things, more general intentions,
more general states of mind basically whereby if you get established upon them, then the particular things,
the matter how fast, how fleeting they are occurring, your mindfulness is not effective by it.
But if your mindfulness is established upon particular fleeting things, then your mindfulness will define the way with them as their cease.
So in the relevant manner, basically, yeah.
Establishing your mind at a more general phenomenon.
And it can be various things in terms of establishing a mindfulness upon them.
So you don't have to, it's not like fixed, you must establish upon this. You can use your body, you can use your feelings, you can use your thoughts,
you can use the motivations behind your actions, you can use those things to establish your mind in regard to things you're doing at a particular level and that's already mindfulness.
So in terms of, if you want the most direct answer, how to be mindful, that's relevant to the suffering and feeling from it.
Well, you have to be mindful of your feelings or of the present feeling, whichever there is.
And even with the feelings you can see, even they have this kind of hierarchy of more general and more ambiguous and so on.
You know, because even the most kind of vague, the far above mood is always, basically, you can regard it almost as a feeling because it has a certain feel to it.
Because you might not be able to define what you perceive in terms of that mood as a phenomenon, but you can certainly say, yeah, it feels a bit, it's a bit heavy, so okay, you're perceiving happiness.
But all of those things you perceive, how do they feel? It's a bit unpleasant, so it's a bad mood.
Or you can have the most obvious, oh, this is a very pleasurable feeling that's coming as a result of me having agreeable perceptions, such as nice taste, beautiful sights and so on.
So if you're obviously, if you're only concerned with those things, then when those things change, when those things move too quickly, your mindfulness will not remain established because it was established upon that.
But say you establish a mindfulness upon that general mood behind these particular things that are rising and sort of interacting with you.
If you establish a mind upon those more general, general sense of, you know, yeah, my mind feels light and expanded, which is agreeable, which is pleasant.
So you can then establish your mind upon that level of feeling, or rather than feeling on that level.
And then when you do have disagreeable perceptions, they will not induce painful feelings because your mind is established on the higher feelings, being higher than those.
And although those are like in the surface, similar, established your mind upon the perception of forest, so then disagreeable perception of the village when you have to be in the village will not bother you.
And it's for that very reason.
So you establish your mind on a higher feeling?
On a more general feeling, yeah.
So you're saying I'm pleasant feeling to go to a higher feeling?
You could, yeah.
Well, no, if a particular disagreeable feeling bothers you, yeah, you're going to higher feeling. And you know, the ultimate higher feeling is accepting that you will die, not being afraid of death.
And then you realize, okay, so whatever has a reason, whatever arises, it will have to cease because it's not going to stay and beset me forever, which is impossible and conceivable.
So then you don't even have to think that anymore when you've thought it's sufficient number of times, because then you just know that whatever has a reason has to cease, for whatever reason that it has a reason, nothing else, nothing other.
So the whole idea of the, and that's what people fear pain. That's why everybody fears pain because when it arises, there is an implicit assumption that's eternal, that's going to last forever.
So you just have that that kind of inside contains that inside fear that this pain that I know that I don't know and escape from, it's going to sort of affect me forever.
Although your reason can tell you know, nothing lasts forever and so on, on that emotional level, you're locked in the assumption forever. And the same for pleasure, which is why, for a mind which is not developed, yeah, pleasure is overly intoxicating.
After the point of oblivion and genuinely developing views, that yeah, you will endure and last forever. But if you start undermining that assumption, then when the pain arises, you won't feel it because you know that it's inconceivable for anything to last forever in that sense, in that emotional oppression sense.
And in the same sense, your thirst for, for central pleasure is your pleasures that you can gain in regard to the world and so on. Well, that will also fade gradually because you realize, oh, that's not possible.
Whatever, so why do I even bother? Why do you expose myself? It's just such a trifle sort of satisfaction in regard to it.
So the mindfulness, establishing of mindfulness is basically establishing a mind on a more general level in regard to your present experience here as a whole.
Because if it's not in regard to the present experience, then it just becomes an abstraction, whatever you're thinking. It just becomes divorced from what you're actually doing. But if you establish it presently and you're aware of its presence, so to speak, then then it becomes very real and obviously very functional establishment.
Whereby anything lower than that establishment, anything less general, anything more particular, I will not cannot bother you, cannot affect you.
That's why the Buddha said you should be taking this as far as necessary in order to develop final freedom.
So then in that sort of dimension upon the perceptions of the forest, you've been perceptions of the village, then he recognizes, okay, so now when I go into the village, I'm not affected by any perceptions and I see they're agreeable or disagreeable because my mind is properly fully established upon the perceptions of the life experience as a whole in the forest.
But he also recognizes the disturbances can still come on account of this perception in the forest. If something happens in the forest, I could lose my mindfulness.
So then he takes itself further, then he establishes his mind upon the perceptions of earth.
So then whether he's in the forest or even more lower in the village or even lower than that in a layman's house, crowded house, then he won't be affected because his mind is fully set, fully established upon the forest.
So whatever he is on this earth, he'll be mindful presently. So theoretically he could lose that mindfulness of being established upon the perception of earth if he was to leave the earth, to fly into space or something.
But if somebody is able to establish their mind to such a level of perception of earth, then they could easily establish it upon the perception of space, upon the perception of those general phenomena that pertain to the mind.
So he would be fine even in space, basically. That's what I'm saying.
So how do you make that perception of earth to not be abstract? You make it by discerning it in your present experience right here, right now, because it is then.
But obviously in order to discern it, you need to know what it is, or at least you need to have some clue.
And that's why it's important to basically learn and inform yourself from the sutras and pondering and discerning it as a phenomenon present.
So only discern it in theory, because that's not a discernment, that's an abstraction.
So there is a present thinking and there is the abstract thinking. And usually people can distinguish it too, and then they kind of disregard thinking altogether.
But that's just a very bad idea, because if you think about solidity, an image is the kind of image of solidity.
Yeah. Surrounding. A concept of gossip.
But when with feelings.
No, because feelings don't appear as concepts, because there will be a perception.
There being felt, so you need to use the faculty of feeling to feel, basically.
That's why I think again, my teaching is for the one who feels, basically, he's teaching is for the one who knows how to feel.
So just sort of being liable to feeling, it's not enough, everybody is that they actually have to know to discern how to feel, and then you will know the feeling.
Because most people think they perceive, most people think when they feel they actually perceive it.
Yeah. When you say feeling, pleasant feeling.
Yeah, you're going to see, that's what you perceive.
A concept of pleasant feeling.
It's absolutely whatever.
So I can designate a pleasant feeling, but that designation is on the level of perception.
Perception of sound, perception of art, perception of even a perception of a mental image of either words, pleasant feeling, written, or some pleasant experience.
So it's basically always perception, and you can't not have the perceptions.
In a sense, you can't not have feelings, because they are inseparable, perception and feeling.
But what you can know is how to feel in regard to that which you perceive.
And not think that that which you perceive is the same thing that you're feeling, because then there will be a perception.
So simultaneously, while you're perceiving, you're always simultaneously that feeling on a level of feeling.
And those two levels cannot make, they cannot come together, they cannot communicate.
They're actually, like, blind to each other.
Your feelings don't know about your perceptions.
No, your perceptions know about your feelings.
It's your assumption that it's the same, that it's different, that it's both same and different.
It's not the same, the different in regard to perception and feeling.
You mix it a lot, and then you assume, and then what you perceive is what you feel, what you feel is what you perceive.
But feeling feels perception perceives, and that's it.
And whether that thing is same, or different, or neither of both, it doesn't matter.
But one is more general than you.
No, no, they'll see, if you would say one is more general than the other, then they'll be comparable.
And being comparable is only the form of relationship, and I said, they're completely unaware of each other.
And because feeling is completely unaware of perception and perception is completely unaware of feeling,
you can, you can, you can free both of them from assumptions and from the sense of self and everything.
Because if there were relationship, then there would be the agent in control of them, in regard to them, external to them, internal to them, whichever way.
What about this, like, joy, joy, and one gets from it to, what, pity, pity?
Uh-huh.
So, maybe we spoke about, to will, to will that, to get that going.
Uh-huh.
And one can do that.
Yeah.
One can generate pity.
Yeah.
Well, pity, partly pity.
Yeah, pity, yeah. And a joy, one can generally enjoy, as an acts of will.
Mm-hmm.
Obviously, if you, your mind is very depressed or something, scattered, unrestrained, that would have much practice.
Yeah, yeah.
But you could, some say, to do that.
And that feels good.
Yeah.
And that way, it seems like I'm in control.
Well, no.
No, no. You think you would be in control if you then appropriate that good feeling.
That good feeling is just the result of the search of way of attending and intending.
Yeah.
And that's absolutely fine.
Mm-hmm.
That's why you shouldn't fear that pleasure.
When the Buddha said the pleasure in regard to Johnus and so on.
He realized, hold on, I don't actually have to, because initially he was disregarding all of the pleasure.
Any pleasant feeling was bad.
But then, when he started developing Johnus, he realized, no, actually, these feelings are not underlined by any of those unwholesome things.
There is no reason to fear this.
On the contrary, I should cultivate this.
Hence, he was declared as the ultimate way of basically getting in the right view, developing Johnus,
and then you'll be fully developed on both ways, are they say?
Through full understanding and through full development in regard to your body and meditation.
Because, yeah, it's that good, or rather, it can be that good.
Wherever you can intentionally call it with the right view, no, without the right view.
But with the right view, intentionally cultivate joy or a rapture or whatever,
and it won't be an also, because you would know it if it's unwholesome.
Because you're just intending.
It's just the result of the intention that's occurring.
Not yours to begin with.
It's not in regard to your body.
No, no, no, no.
It doesn't pertain to the senses.
That's why it's not unwholesome.
However, obviously, you can appropriate that joy, which is why Kutugin and Ken developed Johnus.
Obviously, he abandoned lots of central cravings as a result of it,
because this is much more supply and much more refined.
But, yes, you could.
That's what I mean.
You wouldn't be doing it rightly.
If you then start appropriating that joy and feeling you are in control of that joy,
this joy is mine.
But with the right view, that wouldn't happen.
So then you would just have the proper practice of developing joy
and the right view that sort of sees through any occurrence of lust, aversion, and delusion.
So it wouldn't be before long that the mind would be completely free from all the hindrances.
With that development.
Because there wouldn't be any agitation, there wouldn't be any anxiety.
Even hardships would feel relatively lazy, because the mind gets elevated.
The hindrances won't come up again.
Yes, I say you become an arrogant.
Yes, you become an arrogant.
You don't want to say feeling is always in the background.
I see what you mean.
And you can, well, I think initially you probably have to, because that's where you're going to find it,
because the mind is not too used to much establish the contraception.
And obviously, mind needs to learn how to feel, how to discern feeling among the things that it perceives.
So yeah, and that's the entity in the background.
You won't find it where you perceive it.
You'll find it simultaneously in regards to that which you perceive.
Basically, you have to refrain from attending to the feeling as if it's a perception.
So you have to refrain from attending to the feeling as if you will see it.
It's not actually behind.
It's right there all the time in regard to whatever you perceive it to.
And obviously, it has its own, well, its domain has its own laws, so to speak.
So it's not as diverse as perception.
It's always quickly perception, but obviously it's much more subtle than perception.
Beyond perception.
Well, well, it's beyond in terms of it is nothing to do.
They're not to the same place, so to speak.
While in place is there will already be applicable on the perception.
Comes as a result of perception.
Space in place.
Feeling is in regard to it.
So it's just like two dimensions that you just used to learn.
But the other one is constantly in regard to it.
It's how the unconditioned.
Well, it will be.
When you completely let go of it.
That's why the teaching is for the one who feels,
and that's why he teaches only suffering and freedom from it.
And that's it.
That's the whole dharma in there.
It's only boundless pleasant, because nothing felt.
Or rather, no feeling can touch you.
Thus, you don't feel it.
You don't feel anything.
And that's the extreme.
Like, peace.
So are you going to always see the distinction?
No, he won't see it.
He'll feel it.
No, he'll feel it.
He'll feel it.
He'll feel the feeling, and he'll see it from the point of view of perception.
Or rather, he'll, we won't try to see his feeling.
Or will he try to feel these perceptions?
He'll feel, he'll perceive.
Or rather, feeling will feel, perception will perceive.
Intentions will intend.
So you can attend to a feeling, isn't it?
Yes.
But see, in order to attend to a feeling, you have to, well,
you have to use the proper attention.
Because if you don't know how to attend to the feeling,
well, you attend by the means that you're used to,
and those are the means of perception,
you won't be attending to the feeling.
You still feel it.
Because feeling is an aggregates.
You can't not feel it.
You just, you won't be able to discern what feeling is.
You won't be able to know the feeling until you learn how to feel.
So feeling in itself is not enough for you to learn how to feel.
Feeling and just affects you.
Just hits you.
Good and bad when you try.
So by learning how to feel then,
you can eventually transcend the whole,
the whole domain of feeling.
And a lot of demands are missing.
It's not hard to pay attention.
It's not hard to feel.
It's not hard to feel.
But I couldn't say that at any given time of your experience
is how the feeling is present there.
So if I ask you now,
and that's the thing,
you can discern how to feel because there is
an implicit knowledge of the feeling.
Or a degree of recognition.
Maybe it's not to the level of knowledge, but certainly.
If you ask me how do I feel?
Well, if I ask you how do you feel now,
you would be able to answer.
Even if you say,
well, I don't quite know.
It means, okay.
So you feel like there is no like that,
which means you feel kind of beautiful.
Wearing towards unpleasant,
because you don't really know it.
So you're bored or whatever.
You know.
But they're not ready to answer.
Even some sort of these words describe that.
Sure.
Sure.
But that doesn't still necessarily mean
that you have confused the two.
That you've started.
Or rather, you can describe the feeling
in terms of designation, terms of perception.
But you won't assume that that perception stands for that,
which you feel at the time when you're describing it.
And that's why you can be mindful of the feeling
or feelings as they arise respectively.
At any time, at any place in any situation,
because they're not directly linked to the actual,
like particular sort of perceptions and so on.
Yeah.
They arise as a whole.
Perception, feeling and intention arise together,
cease together.
So you can,
when there is a disagreeable perception or whatever,
that has a reason, for untrained mind,
they're most likely going to be unpleasant feelings as well.
But that doesn't necessarily have to be the case.
And because it doesn't have to be the case,
freedom from disagreeable perceptions
in terms of suffering is possible.
Because if perception perceives and feeling feels,
there's nothing to do with you.
It's a free of the disagreeable perception.
Disagreeable perceptions for protusion mean suffering,
meaning feeling pain, feeling unpleasant.
Because that mix,
or rather that mixing up,
that that wrong assumption in regard to perception
and feeling feeling perception,
that I will think,
it's so hardened that now is the solid thing.
So for him, disagreeable means pain.
Disagreeable perceptions,
discomfort,
and in any of that kind of means emotional pain.
So he needs to kind of,
unravelled,
the whole thing,
the whole assumption,
and then start doing exactly that.
Because if you can see the difference,
and all the difference between perception and feeling,
that's almost, that's John.
Well, if you get established in that,
it would be.
So if you can perceive,
or rather,
if your experience can let the perceptions
perceive in feelings feel,
you become redundant.
And that's John.
My sense of self becomes redundant,
and disappears.
Temporarily,
based on the intention of that establishment,
upon that establishment,
but with the right view,
that's all it takes.
Then the view of the self will disappear,
the views of the conceit,
will disappear and so on,
and then yeah,
you will be in a random.
Because perception perceives, feeling feels,
intention intends.
So this sense of self now,
the link is in regard,
and kind of hovers over these things,
you realize, well,
that's just another perception, isn't it?
The perceives,
there's feeling in regard to it,
that feels,
and intention in regard to it,
that intends.
Then the subtler sense of why I'm in regard to that,
oh, well, the fact that I was just able to designate,
it means that's another perception that perceives,
that has a feeling that in regard to it,
it feels, and intention that intends.
And you can push this infinitely,
until you get tired,
and you realize, oh,
this whole idea,
this whole notion,
this whole concept of,
I am lingering,
is just a more subtle perception,
in regard to the original perception,
it's a more subtle feeling,
in regard to the original feeling,
it's a more subtle intention,
in regard to the original intention.
That's all you're going to have,
is feel, perception, intention.
And when you,
kind of drill that,
long enough,
and in notion of me,
and I am,
it just fades, evaporates,
like heating a pan
that has water in it.
You know,
if there's a lot of water,
you might have to heat it longer,
but eventually,
everything will evaporate,
and then you can stop heating it.
Here's the heart of St. John, of course.
By knowing what John is,
by not mixing your feelings
with your perceptions,
by learning how to feel,
but be mindful of your feelings.
All of those things
can become basis for your John.
So, the one state of mind that,
I can see that,
I did most of my things in my life
was because of boredom,
most things I did.
Again, you've all this,
since you've had it,
you've all been drinking smoking,
all business watching movies,
and boredom.
I think the most people get,
yeah, that's the,
boredom and fear of boredom.
Fear of boredom.
Like genuine fear of boredom.
You know, I'm bored,
but you actually,
everybody, what?
Fear of boredom.
Because when you do get extremely,
extremely boredom,
that's extremely, extremely boredom.
Well, then you start losing,
losing your sense of self,
which is obviously for somebody
who is all about their sense of self,
it's very frightening.
So, that's why boredom freak people out,
because you can lose your sense of self,
not in there.
Well, not losing in terms of,
fully extinguished,
as another hand,
but basically start feeling,
like you're not letting go of the sense of self,
yet it's being taken away.
Oh, but how is it taking away that?
Well, it's taken away through boredom,
basically simply because boredom is unpleasant,
or rather, you've been pursuing,
everybody's been pursuing pleasures,
habitually,
and now they became dependent upon the pursuit of pleasures.
Thus, when there are no pleasures,
even if there is no particular pain,
so it's just boredom,
it's just a neutral feeling,
but because you're so dependent upon pleasures,
that neutral feeling starts to feel very unpleasant.
And not knowing this cave from unpleasant,
you fear it even more,
you're affected by it even more.
So, basically, the whole thing of boredom
just shows you that deep down,
inside of your very sense of self
that you hold very dearly,
you're not in control,
even of that.
And that freaks you out.
That's a solitary confinement,
before I think I'm mad.
And when they come out, they're like,
oh, it's a different person now.
Yeah, you would be.
Obviously, you know,
for somebody with the right view,
solitary confinement would probably result in arranging.
But for those with the other right view,
even coming across Nibbana,
it would freak them out,
as they did in the soup,
and they would understand the goal of Dama
and the Buddha,
or the Buddha was pointing at us off,
they would annihilate us,
they would kill us, they would destroy us.
Because they, their mind,
their attention is still very rooted
in that completely gratuitously assumed sense of self,
but that is real a search,
and that's all they have at a time.
So that's why,
if in that state of mind,
they come across anything they will vaguely indicate,
they are not in control,
they would be quite a good cause for anxiety,
for a deep anxiety.
And then if you stay with a deep anxiety longer,
in the case of prolonged boredom,
you start freaking out,
or you start looking for the way out.
Not everybody would freak out,
some people would say,
okay, I'm going to look,
there is a freedom from this,
because I'm not in control of my own very self.
Now when I say I'm not in control,
I can do anything,
which is something people end up doing after prolonged boredom.
But means basically,
you have no say,
in the very foundations of your own being,
that you take to be yours.
Thus, that's a big contradiction.
If it's mine,
well, you would have a say,
but you have no say.
So how can it be yours?
But you don't know anything,
but to have it as yours.
But now everything is indicating
you that it can't be yours.
So you have a choice.
If you're able to,
you can then just turn a blind eye
and run even faster
from the fact that you have no say in it.
And always kind of be just just sort of enough,
like, you know,
basically you're drowning,
but you're just enough space
to have like a breath of air,
every now and then.
And that's what most people lives are,
constant pursuit,
because it's not,
I mean, the types of pursuit
are optional.
But the reasons for the pursuit
for people are they are not optional.
They don't have to do it,
because if you don't do it,
you start thinking.
And where do you think?
You think in the,
in the basically in the environment
that shows you that things
are indifferent to you,
you have no say,
in your own feelings,
in your own intentions,
in your own perceptions,
yet you're taken to be yours.
That feels basically you're like,
in a locked, in a car,
in a vehicle,
that it's running down the hill,
full speed,
and actually the steering wheel
is not working,
maybe a little bit,
but not in a sense
that you can stop the car.
You turn around.
It's a basic road,
you can choose the way you're going to crash.
But even that,
it's not ultimately not to you,
because you might crash
even before you reach
where you want to crash it.
So you have,
you have a limited degree of control
within the ultimate lack of control.
And where it sounds like suicide is,
like the acts of suicide,
you can,
you don't really
try to do so.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Well, that's what I'm going to say,
if you can only kind of
aim at the body
and then wait for death to come,
to come.
And that's,
that's,
that's,
well, that's,
that's basically,
and even that,
it's not,
even that death
that comes cannot be yours.
Any more than any other things
that you could do during your life
can be yours.
So one alternative
is to keep running away
from the alternative
is to then recognize
that this,
it's not a good deal.
And the contradiction
that your resistance is.
So I'm,
here, I am,
I feel things in mind,
but I'm not saying it.
So then I bet,
I better make the effort
and abandon the notion of
I am,
and things in mind.
So then I won't,
I won't be having to live
this contradiction,
which is actually unpleasant.
So being at the bottom
of extreme boredom
there is nothing for you
to do,
there's nothing for you to have.
Well, there never was.
There never was,
there never was.
There's what it is important.
It feels,
I,
yeah.
Nonactivity.
Abiding in nonactivity.
But we see, obviously,
boredom as a designation,
it's already defined by
two genus,
and it has a very negative
connotation, boredom.
And see,
it has a negative connotation,
but it also implies
quite some,
quite some self-deception
as well.
Guys, I am bored.
It's kind of,
it's kind of all right,
but I don't like to be bored,
but actually boredom is quite serious,
because you might kind of
this try to dismiss you
by saying,
ah, it's boredom,
you just bored.
Leaving boredom
a bit longer,
and then you'll see,
here's that falling apart.
Everybody is falling apart.
What?
Two genus is falling apart.
Yeah.
But more accurately,
it's a neutral feeling
that obviously for
a general, it's not known,
it's not understood,
it's being feared,
it's boredom.
It's insinuct,
it's wherever else
that comes out of it.
But if you actually
recognize it as such,
say,
recognize it in regard to,
like,
low-lear feelings
of,
of sensual pleasure
and sensual discomfort
and so on,
then you,
you actually know
this is peaceful,
this is more sublime.
It's,
it's peaceful,
it's neutral.
And it's quite pleasant.
In order to find
a pleasant,
you need to elevate your mind
to that level.
You need to train
in regard to it.
Because the mind starts
down in the gutter,
always,
just a different extent.
And then you have to work
your way up.
Yeah,
we're,
we're,
we're in somebody's
bored,
negative sense of boredom.
The mind starts to,
yeah,
you can't,
and you start craving,
even craving those
old sentences.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Because basically,
that office itself,
but that,
you spoke before,
the sensual pleasure,
kind of feels like a,
like a quick fix,
whereby,
not just that you,
not just that you get the
pleasure of the sense
that you're engaging in,
but you also get the pleasure
of just kind of avoiding
this boring pain,
this heavy,
anxious threat.
Behind this boredom.
So the pleasure,
makes that disappear,
seemingly,
improvise you with a pleasure
on top of it.
So it's like a double whammy.
But,
yeah,
the issue,
if you don't go
into sensual pleasures,
you just crave for them.
Is this
double the suffering
right there, you know?
Yeah.
Because you're not,
you know,
you're bored.
Initially,
absolutely craving.
Yeah.
So you crave.
So,
so you suffer on a kind of
boredom,
because you're ignorant
in regard to it,
and then you suffer on a kind of
uncontrollable craving,
that you are not,
kind of, covering up
through giving in to that craving.
So you have a double,
double suffering that has been present,
and that's exactly how it is.
It has to be in the beginning.
That's why,
Vinaya,
the Sila,
has to come first.
The restraint,
the presets,
has to come first.
It's not a dharma,
but there wouldn't be any dharma
without it.
So it has to come first,
and then you can start building
within that.
Vinaya,
you can see craving.
It's ugly.
Craving,
equals suffering.
You were craving
for this boredom to be
absent,
to be not present.
You were craving for pleasure
to be present.
You have craving
on both levels.
You have suffering on both levels.
And you don't suffer,
actually.
You don't suffer
because you're not pursuing
your desires.
It's that non-pursuitive desires
shows you the craving
behind them,
which is why you suffer.
But it takes time to discern that,
because craving,
you give in,
you go after a desire,
and pain disappears.
Or so it seems.
Well, the pain disappears
because you stop craving.
And you stop craving
because you have the assumption
that you've satisfied your desire.
But the assumption
is nothing to do with the actual
satisfaction of your senses
or not.
It's just an assumption,
which is why next time,
you probably need more of it.
And more of it.
And harder scratch.
And harder push
and so on.
And for what?
For the same assumption of,
okay, now I'm fine.
But we might feel
at ease temporarily.
So craving disappears.
And then suffering disappears.
But you think suffering disappears
because you said this
when you desire.
But you didn't,
because when craving comes back,
and it always comes back,
because it's not distinguished,
suffering appears.
And then again,
you don't blame the craving
for that suffering,
you blame,
oh, it's a new desire
and you need to satisfy.
But it's actually,
if there is a presence of craving,
means suffering is present.
You cannot suffer,
on any other account,
except one single account,
presence of craving.
In regard to the most extreme circumstances,
the most extreme discomfort,
situations, experiences,
if there is suffering present,
it's not because of them.
It's because of the presence of craving
in regard to those circumstances.
So that's why people are
restrained for people in Spain.
And they think,
I'm hurting now,
because I'm holding myself back.
I'm hurting because I'm restrained.
No,
it's not,
it basically restrained
is a sighting whereby,
if you engage in restraint,
what is revealed
is that craving
is suffering.
Nothing else.
But in order to see that,
you have to stop,
you have to practice restraints efficiently
for you to know
that you should stop blaming it
for pain.
Stop assuming that
is the reason for your pain.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So the sensuality
in itself
is inseparable from craving.
So the perceptions of sensuality
are inseparable from craving.
They imply craving.
Thus,
you're perceiving
sensual desire,
means craving is present,
means suffering is present.
Now, you restraining yourself
in regard to the pursuit
of the sensual desire,
pain arises immediately
through saying no to yourself.
But that pain is not because you said no.
That pain is because,
saying no to yourself
revealed the underlying setup
of presence of craving
is very painful.
And that pain,
how can you deal with it?
Either by extinguishing craving,
which is for most people,
well, impossible.
They simply don't know
how
have not been instructed,
have not heard it,
they have no concept of it.
So the only way,
like, it's not really escape,
but the only way
they could approximate
escape would be given in.
And then again,
happens exactly what I said before.
Oh,
not just that you
kind of obscured
the pain that has arisen,
but now you also
got the pleasure of the senses.
So you kind of feel
although it is good.
Yeah, I avoided the pain
and I got pleasure as a result
through it.
Well, that's,
you can't ask for more.
But the problem is,
the underlying setup
of presence of craving,
presence of suffering,
not just that he hasn't been
affected or resolved,
he just has been fortified more.
So the more you
pursue desires,
the more you crave,
which means the more
the more the craving is present,
the more the suffering is present.
Hence the similarly
of scratching the edge,
you get that relief
temporarily while you're scratching it,
overall you're making it
much, much worse.
Next time it's
scratch harder,
and harder,
and harder,
until eventually,
you're just like a
mangy doll
that's not even aware of it,
but it's perpetually,
perpetually just scratching
and wrapping its skin open.
It doesn't even know it anymore,
it's just doing it as I have it,
it's just scratch,
it's just,
mind is elsewhere,
and he's just ripping it,
just scratching it.
And that's,
you know, quite, quite, quite formally,
human existence.
Expect a burden in this.
It feels like,
yeah, he's done,
isn't it?
Yeah.
When there's nothing to
be happening.
You feel like,
you feel like you're
being annihilated.
Gradually.
Let me quote a pleasant thing,
isn't it?
Once you start having it.
If you're not holding on
to the contradiction of
I am,
while that I am
being annihilated,
that's a discrepancy.
So you avoid,
you overcome that discrepancy,
well,
by basically not holding
on to I am anymore.
So then there won't be any discrepancy.
Splitting,
hurting you,
annihilating you.
Scroplism.
We're here.
It's deliberation.
Okay, that's okay.
As a,
in a monastic life.
Let me just give some practice
to cross,
they're calling me.
You know what I'm doing?
I better turn my back.
Nice.
Go on, sorry.
Yeah, in monastic life.
You come and crop well.
I came across a plot anyway.
What ethics do you embody?
And then just constant thoughts of,
you're dying.
And then ideas of how to survive.
Try, you know,
you might go back to the past.
Try to rekindle yourself.
We try to rekindle yourself.
We can't do this.
Yeah.
What about this?
Don't, you know,
don't lose yourself.
Kind of.
That desperate.
Yeah, there's desperation.
To survive.
Yeah.
Or that's self.
All of our things around the memories,
around the thoughts,
there were dear,
there were significant,
through the sense of self.
Because if I had to be bored,
I'm sure that we can't be in,
that desperate,
attempt to survive.
But being able to watch,
be able to be.
Being able to not act out of it.
To not.
Well, to not act out of fear of boredom.
Not act out of fear.
We'll stop.
So to allow that boredom and that fear to arise.
Yeah.
And just sit through it.
Kind of watch it.
Yeah.
If something happens,
then there's nothing to do
with your intention to run away from it.
But if something happens,
I'm just watching a mosquito trying to enter through the curtain.
Yeah, sure.
If something happens,
while you're being bored.
But if that happens,
if another is out of you,
trying to run away,
trying to, you know,
cover up the boredom,
that's fine.
Well, long be fine,
is hoping for something to happen.
Well, long be fine,
is rejecting that which happened
because you must be bored.
Yeah.
But that all comes
through training in boredom.
You'll be able to start discerning it.
Turn on the distraction.
Through restraint.
Through restraint.
Yes.
And then it will come.
And the more it comes,
the more proficient it is to become.
The more proficient it is,
the more it is better you see it.
And then, oh,
this is training in peace.
With some of this, yeah.
Some of this is not doing anything just sitting around.
It doesn't mess it, doesn't it?
Well, externally,
they might be just sitting around internally.
They are probably doing a lot of wrong things.
For wrong reasons.
Here is the mind,
this goes off into all sorts of directions.
And usually when you sit down,
they are not doing anything,
they tend to them not doing work.
But they are sitting around,
they are doing things they want to do,
which means they are not necessarily bored.
They are sitting around.
Well, nobody likes boredom.
Well, I don't like it.
I don't like boredom.
So, I don't want to appreciate it,
because you can make me do that.
I put a gym in the field, is it?
Because you can kill him.
Well, because he doesn't know how to let go of his head
himself,
and that creates a rather unbearable discrepancy.
And all into this,
which now,
it's kind of obvious,
cannot be mine yet,
I cannot not hold onto it.
So, it really feels like you're being kind of,
a coach on the inside.
And yet, people lose their minds often.
And I can't hold it.
Just get depressed.
We'll get rid of it in the first, yeah.
Catatonic nap.
Yeah.
Because it always seemed like something was wrong,
isn't it?
We let that boredom make it wrong.
That's again,
there's just a view coming from the point of view of sense itself,
so it's used to.
Yeah.
Instead of doing that,
all those, those, those,
kind of collector reviews
would also start fading.
