So, did you ever not talk about it?
I was thinking maybe you had something in mind since you don't get to come here often,
I'll be living here.
Unless you want to just hear me ask.
Yeah, that would be all right.
He's been asking us today for a few days, you told me.
So one thing I was just curious about, how your interpretation about a certain suit that
this is from the Sun Utinakaya, I think Kanda Sunita, it's the one where the buddha compares
form to a lump of foam, feelings to bubble, remember that one?
So for example, one of the stanzas says, be goo-supposed that this river Ganges was carrying
a great law, a great pimp of foam, and then with good sight, we inspect it, wander it,
and carefully investigate it, and it would appear to him to be void, hollow, and substantial.
So what substance could there be in a lump of foam?
So two begoos, whatever kind of form there is, but it past, feature, or present, internal
or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near, the begoo-inspects it, bond
with it, and carefully investigate it, and it would appear to him to be void, hollow,
and substantial, for what substance could there be in form?
Now this is just a translation, I don't know off the top of my head, what the exact
polyword is, for void, hollow, and substantial.
Inspec, as well?
Yeah.
I can look up the polyword if I can make two.
So I don't know if it's just a translation, but to me, it makes it sound like that kind
of, you know, emptiness formed, form is emptiness kind of thing, where out form doesn't actually
exist, it's just a lump, like a foam, there's no center to it.
Well, no, see that thing, nobody says it doesn't exist, this means it's hollow and void,
in its existence.
It doesn't mean you denial the actual appearance of the bubble, of the foam.
So you recognize the nature of that, which is, well, very, very transient, so to speak,
without any everlasting substance.
And then you recognize the same characteristic in this very form.
But that doesn't mean that the whole thing does not exist, which is, and that's exactly
like what you, what you have, what you have just said, the emptiness formed form is emptiness.
Sure, that's true, in a general sense.
But now, what would a person mean by that?
And often they mean the denial, the denial of things.
I'm curious, I mean, it's not real, it's not there, no, it is there, as empty.
If there's nothing there, you can't distinguish even emptiness.
But if nothing is there, there's actually no reference point for full or empty substance
or no substance.
So it is very real, but it's fleeting, it's non-substantial, so to speak.
But as such, it is real.
So that's why you recognize that, and then you apply the same to the, to your form,
to the form that pertains to the sense of self-wide, because sense of self cannot be established
upon that, which is fleeting, and non-substantial, and invoicing, and hollow, and transient.
So applying that to that upon which your sense of self depends undermines the sense of
self.
But leaves the bubbles of the form intact, they were always that.
What has changed is your attitude in regard to them, appropriation they used to exist upon
the assumption that there is substance in it, there is the actual ground for the self.
That has changed, that's gone, and then there's appropriation constant.
And so the same thing applies, and for the rest of the similes, I suppose, the perceptions
like an illusion.
Yeah, for all the other things, yeah, inventions like a plantain.
Yeah, see that whole thing, I thought, it's an illusion.
Yeah, it is, you can regard it, it's an illusion, but again, it doesn't mean that it's
not real as such.
No, we're in the city, it doesn't say it does not exist, it's an illusion, and it does
not exist.
Yet, when you say illusion, and maybe that's because of all of the other schools of Buddhism
or other religious practices, people nowadays, you say illusion, and it's not real, but illusion
is real.
If you weren't really, you wouldn't be in that first place.
It's real as such, it's basically illusion, it's different to what you think it is.
So you're deluded by it.
And when that changes, which you were deluded by in the beginning, it still remains.
Now, what has changed is your delusion in regard to it, that's gone, but the thing remains.
It's like, the essay, Tharmath is such an illusion, and going to that way.
The last one, which I don't know if I have always thought too far into it, but even this
one, you know, there are works that go very deep into detail, whether they're right or wrong.
Like, in this magic of the mind, I think, one of his books where he compares consciousness
to a magician's show, it's saying, suppose a magician or a magician's apprentice would
display a magical illusion at the crossroads, and as bits I would expect it ponder so
and so on and so forth, and same thing for consciousness now.
Now, do you think this similist would be digging just as saying that, yeah, it's, you know,
not substantiate this consciousness, like you're saying, form, or is there more to be
send from that similist, like, oh, it's like a disceptive, or it's misleading, or something?
Well, yeah, you can, yeah, you can say that basically, it's, you have misled yourself with
assumptions in regard to consciousness.
So the magician's performance, if that's the similist, it's really such, it's a magician's
performance, this is what it's done, or your belief upon it, that's on you.
And the most basic deception, the most basic misconception, it's regarding a permanent
that which is impermanent, regarding pleasurable that which is suffering, and then taking that
thing to be yourself, which cannot be, and that's like the fundamental illusion.
So there's, there's no problem in people regarding, oh, this is all illusion, sure, as long
as you don't blame things for that illusion, but blame your own attitude towards it.
But usually, whenever I've heard, oh, illusion, illusion, it was said in a dismissive sense,
whereby, oh, this is all illusion, this is all not real, there is no problem, there is
no nibbana, there is nothing which is already nibbana, which is everything and nothing.
It's just to become, having all sorts of views, because you've just blanked the mind of everything.
But sure, illusion is real as such, so stop being deluded by that illusion and see through
what it is.
And what it is, it's impermanent and suffering, thus it cannot be taken to be yourself, cannot
be taken to belong to you, and that's it, that's all it is.
Bubbles will, and the phone will keep arising for as long as there is a river foaming and
so on.
But when that river drains up, I, when the aggregate breaks apart, that's it, it's per nibbana
and they will not arise again, not even those illusory bubbles and similarly.
Another question that I was, you mentioned, an internal external a lot, I was hoping that
we could clarify exactly those terms, like I know it's kind of a broad question, but
if you general, you know, the Buddha on the side said internal external, both internal
external, not even self-ifatana, but I guess the question, I'm trying to figure out
is like, internal it to what, what is, what defines internal or its external, and is that
if it's, you know, the first ends of the mind is, so internal is mind, external, not, but
then the question is, is it valid to look at things like that?
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, usually, yeah, there is a degree of mind associated with internal
dimension.
But again, broadly speaking, because it is a broad question, an internal external is sometimes
using not always the same sense, as, as, and I think a Buddha said, basically, internal
would be everything that pertains to you, and an external it would be everything that
doesn't pertain to you.
So that's like the broadest, broadest distinction, but obviously fundamentally, like for
an out of hand, for example, there is this conscious body left, and all the name and form
external.
So you can see that that would choose to be his, like this conscious body, it doesn't
say, oh, the conscious body is left internally for an out of hand, and name and form external,
it says, what is left is this conscious body, and name and form externally.
So in that sense, when internal means mind, that is gone.
So now that which used to be taken as mind is still there, but it's not internal in that
personal sense, because more often than not, that which pertains to oneself is what
is once, what, what, what he has appropriated, does internal and mind do become almost interchangeable
when it comes to the attitude of people, but they don't need to do it this way.
So when the business is something like kaya, kaya, nipus, tv, i would be like mindful of
the body in terms of, or in the body, everyone translates it internally, externally, whatever
you.
You're saying that it's a question of like seeing one's present attitude of taking the
body as mind, me, myself, but being mindful of that otherwise.
But you can, that, that in sati-potanasu basically means you can, if you take it, if you're mindful
of the body internally, you're mindful from the point of view of this conscious body
here.
You can be mindful of the same body externally, if you approach it from the point of view
of nama-rupa, which is external, even if it's looking at your own body.
So you always have two points of view at the same time, that is the, that is the like
of that, that the fundamentals of every human experience, what, what the experience of
the five aggregates.
And because you have two points of view, there can't be one sent to them, one owner of
them.
Because they are simultaneously arising independent of each other.
This conscious body, nama-form externally.
So if you're seeing the body in the experience of the nama-form externally, that body is
externally.
If, if you're attending to the body on the aspect of this conscious body right here, because
of which I have this experience as a whole, that is the internal body.
So here you're saying distinction is like, internal will be like my sense of what my body
is, like the idea of my body, like for example, I'm mindful of my body seated, but not because
I'm seeing it, because I know that would be, that would be the external.
That's external too.
That would be external.
So the more internal.
Exactly, internal dimension is the dimension whereby if you, obviously, attend it externally,
it's not the internal dimension.
The internal dimension is a conscious body right here, because of which you can doubt what
the internal dimension right here is, it's because the internal dimension is already there.
So, it's not excessive.
Well, it's accessible only through discernment, so to speak, which is why if you discern it,
you can't appropriate it anymore.
You can only appropriate it when you don't know what it is, then it's mine.
Then this very notion of internal is the notion of mine.
When it's discern, when there is no ignorance in regard to it, there is no mine in regard
to it.
That's for an art hand.
It's just this conscious body, and name and form, it's turn of it.
I don't get it.
No, I don't, I don't.
This conscious body is the, it doesn't appear.
Yes, and yes, it sticks to the negative.
You can say that.
I mean, the appears as a negative, but yeah, if you make the positive, then it becomes
also external, which is not this conscious body.
That's then it's external.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So the external name and form is because of that which external name and form is here.
Because of that.
Say it again.
External name and form.
Yes.
Because of that, because of which external name and form is here.
Yeah, sure.
You can say that.
And that's what I mean when I say that in a way, everything is here.
You can say that, and that's what I mean when I say that in a way, everything is external
to you.
In other words, nothing can be mine.
So if you want to, if you want to, if you start, if a person suspects in this patient,
then the result will be like what is taking to be internal as mine, and then the opposing
role external.
Well, those components, so to speak, remain, but what changes is the attitude in regard
to them.
So really, it becomes more accurate to say there is external, external, and there is the
less external, which used to be internal.
That the internal sense that one's body appears, if it appears, it appears on the level
of Namah Rupa.
So because of that.
And it's such an external.
Yeah.
Obviously, for a protugina, when all that is taken as mine, it takes a Namah Rupa to be
his, and whatever pertains to his body, so it's all a mess, obviously.
But yeah, if it is designated into a phenomenon, positive phenomenon, then it's Namah Rupa,
then it is external as such.
Right.
Because I've understood your statement to somebody in the past where it's like the body that
you can't direct the access, but that by which there is feeling, conscious, or whatever.
Yeah.
You cannot access that directly through feeling, consciousness, perception, because it
receives them structurally.
But you can discern that this body, that you do see externally as a part of Namah Rupa
when it arises as such, is that because of which presence right here and now, this whole
experience is in the first place.
And is that presence right here and now, it's what this conscious body is?
So perhaps one could say then that an internal sense of one's body is kind of like consciousness,
like negative.
It is not, yeah, because this conscious body, it comes in a bundle, right?
You can't separate it one from the other, you can't conceive even university consciousness
apart from the form of the body, nor can you even ponder on the notion of body if there
is no consciousness in regard to it.
So what happens is, with the appropriation, then whatever resembles this conscious body
is just, as it has been piled up on top of that negative phenomenon, and then it becomes
quite positive.
The positive internal of a putuginal, which for him is mine.
So in that sense, internal, perhaps a designation, so a designation, but can't have one of
the gardens, a designation, that's important, would you agree?
Yes, of course.
A designation would never have a problem.
So people think designation is a problem, and they try not saying, I or I am or I will,
because there is no self.
Yeah.
No, the boy, and then was happening to the putuginal, and he said, no, the pilot still uses those
words, those terms, but he knows them as mere designations, and for him, that does not
stand for the actual sense of self.
This question came out yesterday, you were down there, right?
That was yesterday?
And then before, you mentioned thoughts, or your thoughts are external, and that's why
people could potentially read your thoughts if they have that power.
Yeah.
And so that got me thinking like how did that do?
Yeah.
So that means basically that thoughts that are internal, for somebody who has developed
their mind, become just less external than things that are externally external for
everyone.
So that's what I mean.
Those thoughts don't change from the internal domain where they are, they don't go out
into the external where everybody can see them.
They stay where they are, but what changes is the mind in regard to these domains.
And then you can see other people's thoughts.
They are not aware of it, obviously, because for them, it's gripped by the whole pile-up
of internal mind, they mention, which they just regard, it's hidden, but it's actually
out there, and it can be seen from the way they would speak, act, behave, all of these
thoughts as possibilities become as external to somebody whose mind has been developing
regard to both the minds.
They're just part of the mind, and I'm a real part of the conscious of it, yeah, yeah,
of course.
But it seems that the idea of them being internal comes because they're in my brain.
Exactly.
They're placed in it.
And that's exactly, you look at the phone, the bubble, and there's nothing you can
place in it.
It has a reason and such, and it will go.
Same goes for every single organ, every single part of your body, that's exactly it.
There has no substance.
Nothing can be placed in it, there is substantial.
So that's why people need to keep wondering on this, to stop associating any notions of
my, as in me, in this brain, in this body, in this consciousness, is in here.
No, these things are inaccessible for any such placements, they're mere bubbles, and
there's nothing to them, but they're still phenomenal.
As such, exactly, yeah.
Which is why people get confused, that's why they can maintain this misconception, because
these things keep arise, and the misconception keeps existing, because nobody undoes it.
Now the Rupa, in name and form number, that's still external form, because name and form
with time is not that internal sense.
Yeah, it's not that particular Rupa, because of which, there are certain matters, there
is certain matter around the domain of matter, because of which there is the arising of
sites, sounds, smell, add your eyes, your tongue, your ears, when consciousness is there,
that's supposed to be that matter, and that whole relationship, procedurally, you can't
even access it in your thoughts or abstraction, because you need, only through like that negative
direction of discernment, which is what discernment is, because you need a form, the eye working
and a form, you can't just have one or the other, you mentioned also in previous thoughts,
this idea of time-justice being external, with the object, with that form, with the
material aspect of the object, not with the actual object, because the object is the result
of consciousness and form, already being there just opposed.
Right, my experience of an object is different from the material of an object.
Well you can't say that, because that comparison will apply you somehow accessing the relationship
between consciousness and the object, and then inferring the different, but saying that
it's the same, it's irritable, it's the same, it's the same, it's the same, different,
both same and different, not the same or different, makes no sense, because all of those,
either of those would require you accessing that, which you can't.
Thus people maintain notions that this is the same, or this is what the matter is, or
this is different from matter, or this is in the matter, or matter is in it, all of
those things are conceivings, why, because you can't have the second part of that relationship
of which you would need to have access in order to make all of these conceivings.
And that's where they're wrong.
Even if, say, miraculously, they correspond to how things are, that doesn't matter, because
you can't know, you can't access how things are, thus you're conceiving them to be in
a certain way, will always be a misrepresentation.
It's interesting to think about the idea of accessibility, in case it's not being accessible,
not something you...
Not accessible, but there, but there, you know, and you don't exit, you stop trying to
concede the access, when a designation there does not move towards it, so to speak, in
any direction, does not try to access it, even by implication.
When the mind is fully developed in regard to it, then it stops being a conceiving of
that, because of which, the mind is there in the first place.
So it's like, taking up what's not accessible, trying to...
Yes, that's what conceiving is, taking up, just by leaning too much, or leaning a bit
away from it, or assuming that it's in, out, both in and out, neither in or out, assuming
that it's onward, assuming that it's accessible.
That's why the Mola Pariah is so, that is, and it goes around all of the different
objects, you really come to us, why, because it's not what you are conceiving, it's the
actual attitude of conceiving, that that's the problem, that's the root of the problem.
So it's important then to realize that the object being there comes prior to whatever assumptions
you could make of it.
Well, structurally prior, not temporarily prior.
So it's simultaneously present, but it structurally precedes it.
The structure of movement, the notion of movement is preceded by it, so you can't then
access it as a result of that, the structure of space is one, and time.
That's why the Mola Pariah is so, that's why the Mola Pariah is so, that's why the
