This sutra is from chapter 47 of the Sangyutinakaya, sutra number 8, called the kuk.
Bikus, suppose a foolish, incompetent, unskillful kuk, or to present a king or royal minister
with various kinds of curries, sour, bitter, pungent, sweet, sharp, mild, salty, bland.
That foolish, incompetent, unskillful kuk does not pick up the sign of his master's own preference.
Today this curry please my master, or he reached for this one, or he took a lot of this one,
or he spoke in praise of this one, or the sour curry please my master, or he reached for
the sour one, or he took a lot of the sour one, or he spoke in praise of the sour one,
or the bitter curry, the pungent curry, so on and so forth, or he spoke in praise of some other curry.
That foolish, incompetent, unskillful kuk does not gain gifts of clothing, wages and bonuses,
for what reason, because that foolish, incompetent, unskillful kuk does not pick up the sign of his own master's preference.
So too, Beku's, here some foolish, incompetent, unskillful Beku dwells contemplating the body and the body,
ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and pleasure in regard to the world.
While he dwells contemplating the body and the body, his mind does not become concentrated,
his corruptions are not abandoned, he does not pick up that sign,
that foolish, incompetent, unskillful Beku does not gain pleasant dwellings in his very life,
nor does he gain nothing but the body and the body, and the body and the body and the body of his own master.
While he dwells contemplating the body and the body, his mind does not become concentrated,
his corruptions are not abandoned, he does not pick up that sign,
competent unskillful beacodes not gain pleasant dwellings in this very life, nor does he gain
mind from the Sinclair comprehension, for what reason? Because beacodes let foolish and
competent unskillful beacodes does not pick up the sign of his own mind. Suppose beacodes
a wise competent skillful cook were to present a king or royal minister with various kinds
of curries that wise competent skillful cook picks up the sign of his master's own preference.
Today this curry please my master or he spoke and praised this one so on and so forth.
That wise competent skillful cook gains gifts of clothing, wages and bonuses for what reason,
because that wise competent skillful cook picks up the sign of his own master's preference.
So two beacodes, here some wise competent skillful beacodes dwellings contemplating the body
in the body, ardent, clearly comprehending, mindful, having removed covetousness and
displeasure in regard to the world. While he dwells contemplating the body in the body, his mind
becomes concentrated, his corruptions are abandoned, he picks up that sign, he does the same with
feelings and feelings, mind and mind, phenomena and phenomena. That wise competent skillful beacodes
gains pleasant dwellings in his very life and he gains mind from this clear comprehension
for what reason, because beacodes that wise competent skillful beacodes picks up the sign of
his own mind. Some foolish beacodes dwells contemplating the body in the body, ardent, clearly
comprehending mindful. So it seems like he is in a sense practicing stippotana but something's
still gone wrong. Well, gone wrong in a sense of he's not making enough effort.
So he says his mind does not become concentrated, his corruptions are not abandoned, he does not
pick up that sign. And that's how an audio will still remain unfinished. Like sign in terms of
limiter, signs, characteristics, tokens of a thing of the body or the feeling, of the mind in this
case, having given us the audio minds of wants to turn away from it, does want to be focused
really over, whatever. But he's not discerning it. Exactly, if you're not discerning that,
not discerning that background of the phenomena that appear as a result of
in practicing mindfulness of the body.
Yeah, that's why I think it's in that similar sort of, well, in that principle, I think that's
what it's rooted, it's all the idea of like a junior monastic training of sort of attending to
like a senior monk. And you don't do it. Well, I mean, people can listen to it. I mean, that's a
approach, but why? Or rather, how? You can actually benefit from it. If you do it using this,
over if I can exercise and like, okay, you're not going to go with your will, you go with the
senior monk's will. Not because of some blind devotion, simply because, well, it's just another
point of view to your experience as a whole that has a reason. It's a point of view that's the
closest to me. I might point of view. And that exercise can sort of train the mind in picking
up on things or signs, limiters. In this particular case of what a senior monk might need or require,
but generally, it will actually train the mind to pick on the signs,
regardless whether it's internal or external, whether it's your point of view or their point of
view. It doesn't matter. You will start seeing more of the background. And when you know,
how you're not just doing what you want to do, you're actually following in a way someone
else's will, based on trust, based on confidence. And then you start picking on these things,
and the mind just start doing the same everywhere. Against its will, so to speak.
In that sense, even such sort of task of attending and being helpful and so on, you can actually
benefit from. But not if you just didn't mind it as like, you know, I'm the best servant in the world,
like, well, what's the point? So that's why that similarly is quite close to that, like, you know,
you wouldn't have to. His job is to cook, but he really kind of makes that extra effort,
because that extra effort is not actually effort as much. It's more like just learning how to
notice it always. It doesn't matter if it's internal or external or both. You start picking on stuff.
And there is a truth in that, like, when you meet monks throughout the monastery,
the ones that sort of pick on little things, like, what kind of, what needs to, like, they don't
need to be told, constantly do this, to do that, and they're just like a robot. They will be picking
on stuff. They are generally more aware, because that's the way how you pick on it,
on these peripheral little signs and tokens that show themselves. They're not like, in your face,
do this. Don't do that. Okay. No, they just pick on it, and then they make that effort,
so to not neglect that habit. So there is a place for a whole kind of high training and stuff,
but obviously, you know, some kind of just kind of take it blindly, and people don't necessarily
benefit from it as much as they could. So, yeah, it's quite a, it's a good practice.
It's a good practice. Because, you know, those are easy problems to pick on.
Oh, you like that tea. He doesn't use this umbrella. Oh, this is dirty, I could clean, and so on.
That's much easier to pick, and subtle tokens of your mind, like,
how it, like, to what degree turns away from, you know, practicing concentration on a heavy
humid day that doesn't want to do it so I'm like, that will take time to be certain. But if you constantly
just try to discern only that, it will be like, basically, what's the expression? A piece is too big
to chew, right away. And I'll just be able to take them bomb. Exactly. Yeah. Then it just gets
all around me. But it's the same principle that you can train in regard to external circumstances,
and then it becomes easier to be seen. So, when it's talking about signs and tokens,
it's a very kind of general term. Very general term. Very general term.
Very general term. Yes, basically, how you know anything is anything.
Exactly. That's, you know, that's how the whole kind of, the, the, the, the, the,
the number of the designation works by the signs and tokens you're testing in and so on. So, it's just,
it's structural, but you, signs and tokens are always in the background. You know, this is a no.
That's the thing that you have signs of, that defines it as such, that design is in a such.
So, signs and tokens will be a level of, of intentionality as well. That's why it's not,
it's not kind of, there's not like a clear distinction. It's not a level of a mind.
Exactly. On that background. So, just by picking signs and tokens with your eyes, your ears,
you're already training your mind in regard to the same principle.
As opposed to just going to go straight into the abstract mode and try and sign the tokens
and then like you are nothing to root in it. But once you start seeing it in an obvious course
manner, you can start sort of extrapolating that the principle out of it and then this
is certainly the elsewhere, even just purely on a level of thoughts and so on.
Let's start about that entire time with the sign of the mind, which is in the human,
and then bring up. Like basically that in the question, how do I know my mind is in such a way?
Like, pick up the token of it. Well, what do you mean in such a way? What way?
Like, oh, I have a sleepy mind, but how was that? How was it that I know that?
I don't know that well because the sleepiness is there, but how can you know that that is
the sign of the mind? Well, you know that when you know it's the sign of the mind,
when that peripheral phenomenon of picking those peripheral tokens has been developed
to such an extent that now it's a phenomenon itself. On that peripheral level?
Yeah, I mean, I didn't mean to say that, oh, I need things in front of me,
there is the sleepiness there and then just as a rhetorical question, I ask myself.
Oh, I see. I thought it was an initial question.
Oh, no. How do I explain it?
I see what you mean. Yeah, oh, how do I know exactly?
It's time looking. How do I do it?
Okay, so I guess you know that my experience now is all restless,
so I'm sleepy. How? How do I know that?
And then it's time looking for certain tokens and signs of restlessness,
sleepiness that's sort of defined the state of the mind.
So when you become proficient in that, so to speak, and seeing that phenomenon of that peripheral,
then that's the sign of the mind. You recognize the peripheral.
The phenomenon of the peripheral is what the mind is.
It is that peripheral, but it's not seen as a phenomenon.
You might see peripheral in regard to its actual, but you don't see peripheral as a phenomenon of peripheral,
all the peripheral, which means you don't see the sign of your mind.
You don't see your mind as a phenomenon.
What do you mean the peripheral of the peripheral?
I don't know that. Peripheral on the peripheral on the peripheral.
Peripheral on the peripheral is not necessarily, but you see peripheral as peripheral.
As a phenomenon, it always arises in regard to no matter what actual.
So it stops being kind of dependent during your inference of it,
it stops being dependent upon the content that you're actual and then I see peripheral.
You start like that, but the point is basically discern the nature of peripheral.
And that's basically discerning the phenomenon of the mind.
Well, for you, you know, at that stage, you would even stop kind of having to think about peripheral
of the actual, which is always kind of a revelation,
which you see text with the mind is, because that is always present in a way.
For as long as the parallel is in spanned,
there would be the domain of peripheral.
And obviously learning to see as peripheral,
I've seen peripheral on the peripheral,
I mean, like, you don't over-attended and think with an extra actual element,
but you see forwarded it.
That one should also, I guess, see its determinations.
It's peripheral side of the mind, like what determines it.
Well, yeah, I mean, you've seen those only once you start seeing the peripheral,
some of you can't be seen determinations,
and then we'll reveal what they determine. Terminations can only be seen once you have that,
which is being determined. So through that, you see that, which determines it,
because it's not only in their connection,
like the determination left determines this thing far, far right.
It's by seeing the determine through there, through it,
through its simultaneous presence, you can discern what determines its simultaneously,
it's present, which is feeling and perception. Yeah, if you don't do it in the mind, yeah.
Is there a difference between just a mind that is, like I say, sleeping versus being affected by
the hindrance of sleeping at stop and twerk or heavy on transit? What do you mean?
You mean, can I not be sleepy? Well, of course, they can become tired,
but it's different for them. Yeah, because they're not, their mind is not bound by any of such
illnesses. It won't be bound. Those illnesses won't be inducing any long use or any of those who, for the mind,
it hasn't broke free from illnesses. So then it's on the hindrance anymore.
But they still be described in a sense as though it's the eye-entire. Yeah, yeah, of course,
yeah. But that's within an eye-end because it's just a hollow shell of expression that we spoke
before, whereas herpetogen is tired, that will just mean lack of mindfulness. Well, exactly,
yeah. For him being tired or having any of your five hindrance means obstruction to mind from
the obstruction to create discernment because he has not seen through those thick kind of
clowns of hindrances. But once that's seen through and understood, then while you're not
affected by that, you're not in the power. So then it would be generally, because that's another
thing with hindrances, they sort of are not known as escape from hindrance. You have to be evolving
around the hindrance. So by being a little bit sleepy, not knowing what to do, you have to buy the
sleeping, you have to be able to do it in the sleepiness, or we're doing the restlessness, or we're doing
the anger, by not knowing escape from it. By knowing escape, then sleepiness comes at each
genuine sleepiness. You didn't come as a result of you being confused and you got to it and then
you're using it. And so it's just genuine sleepiness. And then you know, actually, it's just
tremendous sleepiness, which means some fat. I'm not very sleepy, basically. But when it's a
hindrance, it's something that you kind of give into. You give into restlessness, you give into
doubt, you give in, because you don't know escape from it. And by giving in, you have to buy it.
And so one should begin then by having mindfulness in regard to hindrance, then you understand
it. It's a good thing. It arrives. Mindful and sure, but it comes often down to just enduring them.
And during the kind of central cravings of any kind, and during the ill will, and during the
anger, there is an enduring sleepiness, enduring doubt. That's a hard thing for much to do,
because doubt feels justified. When you doubt it in the night or something, you just feel
justified in figuring it out. But there's a point where figuring it out sort of ceases to be
the motivation. It's just kind of indulging the doubt. Just fueling the doubt, because the
doubt is burning and you do not drink it. And then you end up, you know, like sometimes
monks get so cold out for three days, they kind of sleep. There's a march to start
in doubting. Because they're indulging it and they have to hurry so much with their indulgence of
sleep. How can you not think of those doubts and things straight? If you're mindful, you will
know where to go online. If you don't give it into that emotional pressure of the doubt.
Or like I just, I'm just so tired, I just need to sleep. And then you just
hold the commit to sleep. That's hard, because you don't have to be angry, you do have to sleep.
Yeah, exactly. So like, okay, so I have to sleep, but I have to sleep mindfully so I can't just
overdue sleep. But when it's hard, you just open up the floodgates and you can't sleep.
So, and there's a thing, mindfulness, if done rightly, cannot not be effortless.
It doesn't require any effort, mindfulness. It doesn't require any strain.
Mindfulness is just a recognition, it's a simple and discernible, what has arisen.
And therefore you can't add too much of mindfulness. But mindfulness is not clarified and
properly developed, then yet. Ah, it just needs to sleep, I can't like it. And then you throw
away mindfulness as well. But mindfulness does not need to interfere, but done rightly,
wanted to fear. Because it looks beyond, it goes beyond any of the inferences. So I need to sleep,
you go to sleep, that does not mean losing mindfulness. Oh, I have a degree of doubt,
I need to clarify something, you're going to clarify something without losing mindfulness,
you don't get caught in a whirlpool sort of problem, or doubt. And same, I thought there is a
disagreeable feeling here, present, there's this misguided man in front of me is irritating,
but you don't get angry, because mindfulness does not need to kind of go out of window when you
get irritated. So then, none of those things can sort of grow into hindrance, which is when
it overtakes the mind, not mind keeps it keeps it in check. That's what it said for an argument,
the feelings cannot overwhelm, or maybe the reference of it is that things don't overwhelm
my mind, is the argument mind is overwhelmed things. I think that's the birth of thought.
Okay, let me add one of those thoughts that we've had in the argument. So the point is,
the argument is always above, his mind is that that's why he's an argument, that's all this
comparisons to it. It's like a great mountain, the movable rock, against the wind, and I don't
know if this doesn't budge. It seems to be as simple as anything that he seems to rise,
just irrelevant to you, not irrelevantly, in different way.
That's when you can see that the mind that's rooted in mindfulness, that does not
drop mindfulness, even when sleepiness is present or agitation or sense-craming. That's when
you start seeing that no matter how you find the five hindrances, they entirely pertain to body
to the sense aspect, including doubt, doubt always requires you to feel, to look for something more,
to read something more, to hear something more, to think something more. So you realize that all
the hindrances are actually both of them, once the mind drags free from them, but their potential
is that in your body, and then you revent it from the hindrance, then your happiness,
for as long as there is this body, there will be hunger arising, not as an injury.
For as long as there is this body, they will be disagreeable feelings arising, not as a hindrance.
For as long as there is this body, they will be sleeping as arising, not as a hindrance.
For as long as there is this body with these senses, they will be certain like a clarity
in regard to certain things, they pertain to their domain, not like a clarity in regard to the
earth and wisdom, not as a hindrance, even then. So then when you realize basically,
ah, no matter what hindrance it is, it is always bodily. And if the mind is older,
you kind of see it through the nature of the body, mind is seen, then automatically
through nature engines, it is because they are seen as pertain to the body.
So then you can, you can go and sleep with clear conscious mindfully, you can wake up with clear
conscious mindfully, you would be eating with clear conscious mindfully, and so you couldn't do
anything wrong. Yeah, where I'm at now, it sounds very strapped, good, it's like, oh yes,
it's all, you know, you're tired, it feels like it's weighing, yeah, I'm pointing my head though.
It is, it is, that's exactly what it's weighing, but that's not what your mind is.
Your mind is not in your head. Right, I didn't mean to say pointing at my head.
Right, right, right, but no, you can do, yeah, yeah, it just feels, it's just weighing, yeah, sure,
but mindfulness in terms of just recognition of whatever has a reason,
even if it's weighing, weighing for you, and so on. That's effort, that just requires only
presence of a thing which is present on its own, so you don't have to do it, you don't have to
maintain it. What you have to do is refrain from doing things they will make you forget about it.
So, let's just refrain from giving in, then you don't have to mind for it.
You refrain from engaging your wholesome, then you don't have to mind for it.
What I meant to say was that everything in my experience is saying that the tiredness
is affecting, like, is a mental thing as well as a bodily thing. Sure.
Because your mind is not very mindfulness, your mind is really bodied, so that mind is affected
by all that bodily stuff. That's why you, you know, you exercise the pressure already,
anybody cravings, food, anger, meditation, yeah, your body, because the mind is delirious,
but the mind is developed through that indifferent presence of mindfulness and discernment of that,
so that, but if at all, then the mind is beyond it. Like in the sense that these are all
have to have the body present. Well, you say, my own, my body is tired and my mind is tired,
but mindfulness in regard to both is not tired, cannot be tired. Just the discernment of the
just simple presence of both, the mind isn't being mindful through the engines. Yeah.
So mindfulness in a way precedes that, which is mind for you right now. When your mind gets
developed, then mind gets aligned along with what mindfulness is, and that's why mind development
is possible, because the possibility of alignment is there.
