I come in question, and I keep hearing you say, why is my existence said to be Dukka?
Why is my life Dukka?
You mean house by the people who don't necessarily would think that that's the case?
Why is existence? Why is the existence Dukka?
What is meant by that?
Yes, what is meant by that?
Yes, what is meant by that?
Probably talked about it before.
Even if it didn't, it basically comes down to the possibility of suffering.
And that's it.
You exist means suffering can touch you.
That's it, can.
My non necessarily do so.
But the fact that it might, that is suffering itself.
That possibility, if you might suffer at any given time, at any given moment,
means your existence is suffering.
That's a very happy life.
Never experience any misfortune.
Nothing like that, which is quite unlikely, but say an ideal case scenario.
But the fact that at any given moment of your life, you might meet with this more fortunate or anything,
that you might find that disagreeable means that possibility, that kind of blooming possibility.
But the record is that you feel unpleasant in regard to it.
Thus, you feel unpleasant in regard to your existence.
Thus, existence is Dukka.
So it's better not to look at it.
Yeah.
Well, no, that's what most people do.
Because that's just the ignorant default response.
You just don't look at your existence.
That's why so many people are afraid of boredom.
But generally, terrified of being bored, terrified of not having anything to do,
there's no distraction to keep them floating on the surface.
Why? Because then all these things emerge.
Because they are always there.
So the only way that you can kind of cope, not resolve an issue by cope,
would be to find plentiful distractions, chase your desires like a maniac as much as you can.
So they keep your gaze diverted from that, which is underneath.
But boredom.
So there's nothing taking your attention away.
This weight just kind of shows itself.
It doesn't come onto you because it's actually always there.
It just gets revealed again.
And you can actually, you know, sometimes you have people, no, man,
there's not my life's good.
Sometimes bad, but generally it's quite annoying.
I disagree with everything in suffering.
Everything is not suffering in terms of everything is miserable.
But everything can be suffering.
Everything put potentially cause you suffering.
And then it's suffering itself on a very subtle level.
Suffol, but profound.
It's a subtle, I don't mean like tiny, significant, nst.
So even those people, just if they were to be locked in for 24 hours or something
without any distraction, I think they could have changed their mind.
Except boredom would treat them up.
You've been busy with the things that make you kind of give you pleasure.
Yeah, it's like that's an extra drop.
I mean, you're busy for various reasons.
And they'll kind of merge into this motivation that's rooted in our hearts.
And also because you've been busy because you basically don't want to look at the problem of your existence.
So you're finding things to do that you tell yourself are very important and need to be done.
It's my duty. It's my duty to do this.
No, you choose your duties.
Literally, and you got to anything and everything.
So you do things because basically you're running away from looking at your existence.
So being busy keeps you distracted.
Then sometimes, well, often, things that you are doing are also providing you with sense pleasure as well.
So not just that you are distracted initially from the problem,
but then you also have pleasure on top of that.
So you can see how it's easily very intoxicating and then people never look back.
What?
Because there's always something going on.
Until there isn't. Until you get sick. Until you get off.
Until you die.
Oh, it provides the double.
The distraction and the pleasure.
And then, obviously, it proliferates.
The more things you do, the more things you create, the more things you do.
Based on things you do.
But the initial motivation of being distracted from the problem of existence,
that's like a thread that pertains to whatever you do, basically.
So you do this and then because you do something more, something more, something more, something more.
And you spend your whole life doing it, but that thread is in common all of it.
And that's how people, you know, the cases when people have been doing things their whole life,
working or whatever, and then they get old.
And then the moment they're not able to physically perform things, the whole life they've been doing,
the mind goes, they lose it, they go quickly.
There's an injury or something, that's it.
Within a week, they're gone, like mentally.
You don't recognize people, nothing.
Because the whole life, it was just depending on that little thing.
And that's inevitable.
That is inevitable.
The old age is so hard, you know, in the suitors, they would have worked often.
And what people would come to with and say, yes, indeed, you know, I remember when I was, you know,
I could catch a galloping horse and I was, you know, finding my youth and so on.
Now, I want to put my foot here, but it goes there, I like that completely.
And that's so hard because imagine a person who spent their whole life depending on their senses for this distraction.
There was an underlying pleasure and so on.
To not look at the existence, that was the sole purpose.
And now the senses fail. Now you can't see.
You can't hear.
Let alone provide yourself with many full pleasures of sights and so on.
Not just failing.
Which means that whole, well, that sole motivation for pursuing the senses and the distraction and so on.
There was provided through that.
It's just again there. And now there's no escape from it.
So, all people very often become very unhappy.
Even if there's nothing necessarily, just unhappiness, miserable, angry, anything.
Just not in a good place.
Because you can't distract yourself anymore.
Or they try to distract themselves with their family and grandchildren.
With the joy, the thoughts of my grandchildren.
Because nothing, your senses don't provide you.
You can't even see them. You're blind now. You can't hear them.
But you think about it.
Which is, like, again, even more perilous position because it's a completely independent people.
So, when they do something that you do not,
there's exactly one thing I'm going to bring up now.
There's, I was looking at some people that I know they have, you know,
the father and the mother, their daughter as a child.
And now the grandparents are obsessed and completely encroached in that grandchild.
That little girl, and she's, you know, the center of their universe, the center of their world.
And just provide a major distraction to, you know,
everything else is pushed to the side, basically.
The center of the area is that.
But all their happiness, and I was looking at some of their photos.
All their happiness.
They look very happy and excited.
The baby is always in the center, literally in the center all the time.
And you can just see how much their happiness, how much their happiness depends on their child.
That little girl and the things that could go wrong.
If something happens that will go.
She could hurt, she dies, all of a sudden.
You got, you know, these four people's lives are completely,
that's done destroyed.
And they had themselves to plan it.
The full responsible for placing so much importance on that child.
And I don't mean, I mean, so much emotional importance for them.
I'm sure you look after it, of course.
But placing so much importance for the purpose of distraction and pleasure
and not looking at your own existence.
So then, yeah, when something does happen, it will.
It's again, in the suitors.
When the child dies, you know, they found their own streets destroyed.
Where they gone, my son.
Yeah, yeah.
That's when it, the Buddha says, yeah, suffering, limitation.
It comes from that.
And those who, which idea.
And they had mad, who suffered because of his son is gone.
He says, what are you talking about?
Oh, yes, yeah, yeah, yeah.
He said, when the Buddha told him that the family and the children are so suffering.
And the man says, no, no, we're talking about this.
So it's a pleasure.
And he went to another ascetic and something.
No, he went to the gamblers on the side of the road.
The gamblers.
People were really obviously so good.
Most likely agree with him.
And they said, no, of course you were right, the Buddha was wrong.
And then the queen reported it to the king.
Well, she had the report to her, then the king said,
sure, the king, the king heard that.
And he went to the queen because she was the supporter of the Buddha.
And he said, see, like I also disagree with the Buddha.
It is because, look, all these children are so suffering.
And then she went to the Buddha and it would explain.
And she went to the king and said, do you know your favorite son, your favorite child?
If something happens to him right now, like that you can't prevent.
If he dies for the ill, would you be, of course, of course I would be believing.
I would be destroyed.
Well, that's how children are so suffering.
Oh.
And I mean, you know, it sounds obvious.
And it is obvious.
But that's obvious on the intellectual level.
But emotionally, that might not mean anything if people are fully attached.
They'll just ignore the fact because they're already fully dependent upon it.
No.
But ultimately, at the end of the day,
they're trying to become very dying.
And you can't have them.
That's why it's not just that it's not a solution.
It's a coping mechanism that basically makes things worse.
Because the worse, the harder you're running away from something,
that you ultimately cannot escape.
The harder it will hit you.
But most people don't know that they're running away.
They're not intense, you know?
Well, it's an act of bad faith, so they're not fully aware.
But the reason they're not fully aware is because they don't allow themselves
to be fully aware of it.
They're not fully aware of it.
But that's not exactly.
That's why bad faith is that it's an unwholesome attitude.
Where basically you convince yourself.
But in order to convince yourself of such things,
you need to know what you convince yourself against.
So they basically threw that bad, threw that running away from their resistance.
They're carrying that reason for running away.
So you can't really escape it.
So you're making it worse because it becomes implied in everything you do.
And then ultimately, it catches you as you would have always done
because it's just...
And that's why, that's why, for many people,
centrality and giving up centrality, it's not.
It's high because it's not just, oh, it's not just that you're giving up
pleasures, they come through your senses.
But then you're giving up the only means of
a soul of escape that you know from that weight of your resistance
depending kind of looming possibility of suffering.
You think you're landing on you, crushing you.
So that's why, for people, centrality, it's not really optional.
I mean, it is optional, not just a matter of choice,
but it's not just about pleasure.
It's about having distraction to keep you floating on top of your resistance
whereby you won't have to look down below.
It's just in our space to breathe, but that's about it.
Beneath us for somebody who's now got the idea
and who's looking, oh, my resistance is a problem,
and I'm going to die.
I must not practice it, it's a value in awareness.
Well, then they have to start going against that old grain upstream.
Yeah.
Because, you know, everything, the desire of the senses,
the running away, everything points down.
So it's easy to give in.
So when you recognize that they're just making things worse,
now you actually have to stand against that flood
and then go the other way.
So, well, you can imagine how hard that is.
What do you want them to imagine?
You're doing it.
But basically, that's why many people, and again,
because you know that deep down, you know,
that you are running away.
As I said, because you're carrying those reasons,
as you're running away, because that's why you're running away.
When you do, if you do, stop and think about going against the grain,
then you just feel like, ah, hard and heavy, that will be.
And that flood will most likely take,
and then you're just carrying on.
Just pretend and just go down with the flow.
But for someone who's going out, you know,
like a grand, grand daughter.
You don't love so much.
How do they?
Well, theoretically, it's possible, but practically,
it's pretty much impossible, because they spend 80 years of their life
cultivating habits that were going with that flood,
with the flow, with the distraction, with the desire.
So that look, that looks.
So basically, they got so entrenched now in those directions
that there are simply the faculties and not strong enough.
The mind is not strong enough to theoretically,
yeah, as there were cases in the suitors, the old lady.
Do you remember when she had three sons?
They married and children, everything.
And she and her husband were really well to do.
And her husband died.
And she thought, well, why don't I divide all of our property?
And they had a lot of it, and give to my three sons.
And they looked after me.
And she did that.
And they looked after her in the beginning.
But then, basically, they were just started
well, being annoyed by her.
They didn't like her.
So she would be going to visit one son,
and she would hear the daughter and all saying,
well, look, look who's coming again.
She has other sons as well to look after her.
But she's coming here only.
Then she heard that from all of them
and got basically completely heartbroken.
And she was, well, over 80 probably.
Given, you know, grown-up grandchildren as well.
And then she, she ordained because she didn't have anyone else to stay.
And she saw the nuns having a monastery and getting food.
But she couldn't go pin the bun because she was too old.
So she was staying behind and cleaning the monastery
and pin the bun.
But she was quite junior.
She never met the Buddha.
But one night, she had one nun repeating to another nun
what the Buddha said about impermanence.
And that, like, one of two lines.
She was basically contemplated on day and night.
While she was cleaning.
And then at night, she would be blue and walking meditation
in the corridor.
But she was so, she couldn't walk.
So she was leaning on the wall with her hands.
And she was walking up and down.
And she became another hand.
So you can say, wow, she would.
That was so basically, she put in hard work
after being completely broken by her own family,
by her own children, abandoned.
Basically, the very last stage of life.
But that little instruction, she got second hand.
She drilled it in deep enough until penetrated ignorance
and everything else.
And she became another hand.
So it is possible, theoretically.
And in a very rare cases.
So for omitting.
Yeah.
My little one.
You don't have to go around.
Trying to let everyone abandon you.
No, of course not.
Just recommend this possibility that they might happen.
And that's more than enough to go on.
In terms of practice.
There's the, you know, not a bit of a saying about the vertical view.
And how to maintain the vertical view.
And not to run away.
And hide in distractions.
Yeah.
How do you, as a monk, as someone is practicing?
How do you...
Well, by developing mindfulness.
In their life.
Not mindfulness in terms of some kind of weird robotic method,
meditation, repetition, noting.
But mindfulness in a sense of recognizing intentions behind your actions.
Because for as long as you have performed a certain action,
intention to do that action is there on a more general level.
It's your mindful of the reasons why you're doing things,
why you want to do things.
And if they're rooted in unwholesome, you don't do it.
If it's something you have to do, then you re-root it into something
that's not unwholesome.
Okay.
Such as eating food, as we discussed before.
It can be rooted in a very unwholesome sense of pure sensuality.
Or if you contemplate and dwell on it and drill it long enough,
you can root it in no.
I'll root it in necessity and I don't care what I eat.
Whether it's the softest, nicest food or the roughest.
Because you remain rooted in necessity of eating food
to sustain the body so you can practice.
So by being aware of your reasons and intentions,
you will basically...
Well, you won't be able to fall into bad faith.
You won't be able to fall into that self-deception.
And you won't be doing things for the sake of distraction.
So that's how the vertical view is maintained.
Or, well, developed.
Because it will take time to kind of elevate your mind
to start looking vertically at the nature of things.
Because it's been just going, you know, flowing very horizontally
with a powerful flow of sensuality and distraction.
So that's why people who don't...
Well, people haven't been practicing, but they might get ahead of it.
Like, say a layperson, including myself at the time,
when you discover Buddhism and then...
But then you can't differentiate.
Then when you recognize that you've been doing things for the sake of distraction,
then it feels like whatever you do,
it was done because of that distraction.
And most likely it was.
But it doesn't mean that they won't be appointing the future whereby you can then do things.
They won't be rooted in the distraction.
So people sort of can't differentiate.
And then they try...
Well, they attempt to throw the whole thing away and then stop doing anything.
I must not do this.
I must not...
Like what I was...
I must not exercise.
I must not go out.
I must not go out for a walk.
I must not sit in the nature.
No, no projects.
No, nothing.
But that's impossible because that then becomes your doing of not doing anything.
That's what you're actively performing and you're not aware of it.
Which means you're not actually developing mindfulness in regard to the intentions and the actions properly.
And people like that, again, including myself,
when you see others doing,
it's all done for the distraction.
But it's not.
Well, it can be, but not necessarily.
So you need to know the motivation.
And we discussed that before.
Like you're in the monastery,
you want to go down to the reception room where the library is.
So you look why...
Well, where is your intention to do that?
Where is it rooted?
Is it rooted in the desire to maybe find some people or other monks there
and have something to chat with because you were actually bored in your room?
But then you can't admit that to yourself.
So then you say, no, I want to go and get some books to read,
some good useful books to read.
But the real reason remains rooted in going,
hoping to meet people there to chat for half an hour and get a bit of entertainment
or whatever.
Or distracted just because your room is getting too heavy.
Or then if it's rooted in that, you don't do it.
If you still want...
If you still think, well, no, I do want to get those books.
And you make sure you stay focused on the reason...
on the wholesome reason for going down to the reception room where the library was
to get the books.
And then even if you do meet other people,
well, you won't be entertaining that as you will be getting your books and getting back up.
As opposed to, I will not do anything.
I will just sit in this room.
And that's it.
I will never leave.
That still will not re-root your intentions,
which means you'll still remain rooted in that wholesome.
And wholesome, you'll just abstain from it.
Sure, that should be a default response if you don't know what to do.
Abstain from it.
Again, if in doubt, don't do it.
Like, well, in vinegar.
Acting out of doubt, it's a minor offense.
Even if actually what you've done wasn't an offense.
The fact that you acted out of doubt was a minor offense.
But that doesn't mean you should actually cultivate that
and stain that doubt for the rest of your life.
But you should be asking why.
Well, exactly.
So I don't know.
So I'm not going to do it.
But then I'm going to see why, how, and if you re-root it,
then you can do it.
Again, was it marked with Japanese?
Yeah.
When she asked about that, oh, I'm going for the Vassa retreat.
I'm going to be in seclusion for three months.
Give me a brief instruction so I can...
And he said, whatever you know is an wholesome abandon it.
Whatever you know, it's wholesome.
Don't attend it.
And she...
That was enough for Harara and she after three months.
Because people realize they are kind of entrenched in an wholesome.
Then they fear everything.
You know, you try to fear yourself from an wholesome.
But the false response is throwing everything away,
including wholesome and not whole everything.
I will not do anything ever again because everything is an wholesome.
Everything is done for the distraction.
Everything is done because of my ego, my conceit.
No.
It's done because of ego and conceit and vanity.
If that's where it's rooted.
If you don't rooted in those unwholesome things,
you won't be done for those purposes.
Externally, people might not be able to tell the difference.
They'll say, oh, look, he's all vain and conceited, arrogant.
But they can't tell the difference.
Because they themselves are rooted in those things.
That's what they see.
I mean, you know, the Buddha himself.
He said, when the first man he met after the life,
and he said, I'm the greatest.
I'm self-embodied.
Nobody's my teacher.
And that's factual.
But for the man who himself is a victim of his own conceit and vanity,
he's a proof.
So beat, my friend.
The role he's either left.
Thinking, what was he thinking here?
What he was the Buddha.
Because he couldn't judge.
He couldn't tell.
Because, you know.
So that's why there is obviously the unwholesome things
that cannot be done against the presets.
But in all of the other things, in between,
things that are not necessarily good or bad,
you know, they are determined by your intention
that's behind performing those actions.
So as I said, going to the library,
it's not necessarily a bad thing, but it can be a bad thing.
Oh, I want to go on to my Sutta study group.
Well, that's a very noble thing to do.
Well, not necessarily.
If you are going there because you want to be, you know,
checking people up or distracting yourself
on the pretext of studying the Sutta's.
So then some...
But many people judge things.
Well, judge book by its cover.
Because it requires a degree of wisdom to not do so.
Oh, the universe is accepted.
The Sutta study group in the monastery is a good thing.
We all go and do it.
And probably like 90% of people might be doing it for completely wrong reasons.
As I can watch, because I witnessed it many times.
When people just go there, because you just feel like,
hey, we're doing something together, we're part of it.
Just in the distraction, you're in the, you know,
silent retreats or something like that,
but there's nothing that's happening.
No, no, this is good.
And you feel justified.
That's the thing.
And by feeling justified, you must the fact that you yourself chose
to go there for the reasons of distraction
or something other unwholesome.
But then you feel justified because externally,
that is generally accepted is a good thing to do.
Ah, good, I'm fine then.
But you're not actually.
That is probably more dangerous.
Than just strongly, just say no to everything.
Like, I'm not doing anything.
Yeah, I'm not very painful, but I can at least bring some wisdom eventually.
As opposed to masking it like that.
But this is good, because look, all of these senior Max said it's good,
and all of these people do it.
It can't be if you do it for the right reasons.
Or is it all in as scholars?
Yeah.
People who can't do as scholars do.
Yeah, it works.
You feel good.
Fully justified, spending your time, you know,
studying etymology stuff, but not for purpose,
getting the meaning, but for purpose, just becoming a scholar.
But you feel, again, all right, you know,
spending five days, if you're weak,
just printing random CDs,
because they're all about the dama or whatever else.
And then you're doing, you know, publication.
Publications.
And if you're full just because this is good work, it's dama work.
You're doing it for completely wrong reasons.
You're doing it because if you were to be put in the middle of the jungle right here,
you would probably free count.
And if that doesn't worry you,
the fact that you're not able to exist anywhere in peace,
well, that means you're not really practicing correctly.
Or at all.
No matter how much you know.
No matter how many years you spent,
dealing and working around and about the dama.
You haven't got anything from it.
Well, what is, you know,
you get this idea of the right efforts
to abandon and hold some cultivators.
But that idea comes across as
you've got to be doing something,
doing the duty.
You go and learn the suitors.
You do practice this.
A silver bar, a bar mask,
holding onto virtue and duty.
No, no, just rights and rituals.
But duty, the rightful duty,
the duty of me as a monk,
the duty of holding on to it.
And that's the thing.
Holding on to it means doing it for the wrong reasons.
So, as I said, initially,
you have to hold on.
That's a winner or a sealer comes first.
You take it.
You hold it.
But in within that,
you're supposed to develop discernments
that then makes you let it go without actually externally
breaking it necessarily.
Letting go of unwholesome.
And letting go of wholesome,
you know, for another hand.
Doesn't mean he goes and becomes wild or whatever else.
So, it's that sense of duty, yeah?
Because that's quite risky.
Because your whole existence as a monk
or as somebody who practices with a teaching
that you've invested 20 years in practicing Dharma,
doing the treats or whatever else,
there is that sense of duty
that has been built up.
And now letting go of that
would basically expose your entire existence
since you became a monk.
Your entire, basically, investment.
Your entire life.
So that's where many people never do it.
But that's like people
who try to cross the show
but are too afraid and they stay.
So they came to the show.
They found what they need to cross.
But they're too afraid to actually start crossing it.
So they just stay in that show,
looking at the other show
they're supposed to go
and they're often happy with that.
Because no matter how much,
how many years you spend cultivating
and preparing,
when you start crossing that river,
it's not a guarantee
that you will get to the other side.
But that is the risk
that needs to be taken.
You can't.
You can't answer it.
No.
Because if I try, I might fail.
So I better not try
and then just remain concerned
about trying but never do so.
And that's like people who spend their life
studying about the Dharma,
the scholarly aspect.
I mean, all the scholars do that
but many would do it for those reasons.
So you end up evolving around it
but never really getting through with it.
Collecting information
from this teacher and teachers.
Learning about the other show
on the second hand.
Then write effort.
Write effort.
How to do that?
What is there?
It's when they say
by doing things full-on with heavy energy.
The right effort will be determined
by the right view.
Because the right view always comes first.
So right effort will be...
Again, it's what I was speaking about.
Make sure...
Well, right effort, right intention.
Right effort will come from right intention
which will come from right view
and right view would be making sure
the things you're about to do,
the things you want to do.
The things you feel you need to do
are not rooted in the unwholesome.
There are duties you just have to do.
But even then,
it doesn't mean you shouldn't be mindful of them.
Or you should feel justified in doing them.
Oh, there are things I need to do.
Bottom line is I always choose
to do these things.
Even if it feels,
oh, I need to do this.
Yeah, you're the one who chooses that
to be that which you need to do.
Can you make it effortless?
Like, it's kind of...
What are you doing?
You don't have the intentions to do it themselves.
Yeah.
That would be the case of another hand.
But that's the thing.
Like, for protrusional,
that would mean like,
you are not there.
These things are just done.
And on paper,
that can be said to be true.
But that can be achieved only
through fully doing them.
So to speak.
And by fully doing them,
I mean fully,
thoroughly accepting responsibility
for every slightest intention
you choose to act upon.
Not the other way.
Not by kind of finding a state
where you forget about your intentions.
And then things just happen.
No, that's completely the opposite.
But it might kind of revolve around full circle
and externally almost look the same.
But there is this on the inner side,
there is this whole trajectory of a certain
that you actually have to go through with.
And you go through that protrusional start
by fully accepting responsibility
for everything he does.
Why?
Because he chooses to do all of it.
Even things that he has no choice about.
So to speak.
Things that happen to you,
happen to you because you've
taken, you've chosen to keep
that the other things can affect.
So like misfortunes, accidents,
they're not really your fault.
If they affect you,
well, that's a new why,
because you're holding onto the body,
there is subject to misfortunes.
Subject to accidents and so on.
So you take full responsibility
for things that you cannot possibly control.
That's why it's so hard and heavy,
especially in the beginning.
But then, by fully accepting that responsibility,
you literally go through that responsibility
without abandoning it.
And then you find the way out,
in case of another hunt,
whereby, while it does remain,
it's a pure individual.
Pugula, just the five aggregates,
free from Upadana,
and they just rise and fall
until they break apart.
But that can be done only
when you actually go through
with a whole think of responsibility,
intention, not performing.
So basically, unwholesome needs to be avoided,
not just,
or I keep the presets,
but even mentally.
So even if it's not really,
if it's not really morally wrong,
the fact that I was about to go to library
because I was becoming a bit anxious in my room,
so I needed a distraction.
That is like shooting yourself in the head
from the point of view of dharma practice.
That is a serious mistake.
And you can,
you'll be impeccable externally,
perfect month form,
and never break any rule.
But you keep doing things like that,
you'll never ever progress in any way,
because you're just not really looking at the root,
at the core of the problem.
You, as you said the other day,
you have resisting the possibility
of suffering, of pain, of pain.
Even when there is no pain,
there is a possibility of pain,
which hurts you basically,
and you're acting upon that.
So you're acting because you're afraid.
So you're acting out of unhulsing.
So you're, so instead of going
part of that distraction,
you sit in your room,
and the possibility of pain
starts becoming more of a reality of pain.
Then you have to deal with it.
That's why I did that suit.
And the Buddha said when he was in that jungle,
was it fear and dread?
I think it was called fear and dread.
When he said if there would be a fear
or an awesome state arising while he was walking,
he would not change that posture
until he dispels the fear first.
Why?
Because whatever he would have done,
while the fear was present,
he would have been rooted in the fear.
And he recognized that.
He could have been rooted in.
There's nothing unhulsing
with sitting down once you've been walking.
But if you're doing it for the reasons of fear
that arose while you were walking,
that is unhulsing.
And nobody externally can tell you that,
because nobody externally can see that,
which is why don't pay much heed
to people judging things based on external factors.
Oh, and there's another sentence
that says there's monks or people
who are very agreeable, very soft-spoken,
and people love them,
and people praise them,
and it's so great,
it's so nice, it's so nice,
and they're completely ignorant to two generations.
And then you had other people
who were monks and peoples
who were quite hard to live with,
unbearable root,
whatever else,
and they were at hands.
Because those things pertain
to basically the personal levels.
So as you can see,
I don't know.
He said down because he was tired.
That's what externally might appear like.
Well, no, he said down because he was afraid walking.
Well, the monk who was storing rice
and then rehydrating it the next day or so.
Oh, the one because the village was too poor.
Yeah.
And he didn't want them to waste the food,
because they would be starving.
But then some people could say,
of what kind of monk is that?
He didn't keep that rule,
and he exposed food.
Yeah, the Buddha replied to him,
but not on that personal level,
but just from a higher perspective point of view,
whereby in the future,
doing that,
was most likely result in unwholesome,
because most people are not actually developed
as that monk.
Yeah, he was never.
So then he said,
well, it's still don't do it.
The intention was wholesome,
but externally, the vineyard,
don't do it because other people will not be able to do it.
But the thing is,
the point I said,
people can,
people of Petruginus can praise and blame you
for just with that,
but praise and blame is not a measure
of somebody's attainments.
No.
If he gives blame or praise,
it's going to be on the level of...
Of Petruginus.
Of Petruginus.
So if they praise you,
if the Petruginus praise an arrogant,
he does it for the wrong reasons,
because if he were to do it for the right reasons,
he would be at least sort of by himself,
and he would know where the right reasons are.
If Petruginus blamed you again,
he does it for the wrong reasons,
because if he were to have the right ones,
he would be only comforting.
Yeah.
Well, you know, people just assume,
you need to have,
well, based on,
based on your own,
you know,
life and learning or whatever,
you just assume that,
a wise person,
person knows must be some, you know,
old man,
but then you had,
you had the suitors,
you had like,
what was that?
When the king came today,
the way they were staying,
the first row, sort of,
and the king went to see him,
and King Pasinali, maybe.
And on the way there,
he was meeting all these monks,
doing walk meditation
and just just living there,
with a young,
in the prime of their youth,
a life that could still fully,
enjoy central pleasures,
and they looked really happy and healthy,
in this remote forest,
and then he went to the Buddha,
and he was just smitten by this whole thing,
which was such an experience,
he was praising it,
and it was in the end,
because, you know, they don't follow,
on account of any external observances,
and they're certainly not happy,
on account of those things,
they follow,
because they understood the dharma,
and you know,
well, you had children,
back in the day,
understanding the dharma,
obviously, that's quite unlikely today,
but it's still possible.
So it's this understanding,
which can't be really measured externally,
certainly not,
by the measure of Patugina.
So that's quite,
I think that's also a useful thing,
for somebody who knows that he's a Patugina,
and wants to practice to know,
because,
you won't become evicting then,
of sort of developing,
no, this is what's right,
this is what's wrong,
and then convince yourself,
that you, as a Patugina,
know what right is,
and what wrong is,
because if you were to know that,
you wouldn't be a Patugina.
The description of Sotepan,
I mean the Sotepan,
is he knows right,
as right,
and wrong, as wrong.
So if somebody who knows that he's not a Sotepan,
says, no, this is right,
and believes that,
he's just blocking his own development.
Oh, you hold that view now,
and deep down you know,
actually, that you don't really know,
and you certainly don't have a criteria.
So you can't help by having a judgment.
That's just a natural thing.
It's thinking is a form of judgment already.
But what you can't help,
is not the other believes on account of your judgment,
especially when you know,
that you don't really know.
So you do have your,
you can't help it,
but you make sure that you find
the right judgment,
the Samadhi,
the right view,
and then you use that as a criteria,
or rather that becomes the criteria.
You become that criteria.
So I'm back to the room sitting in your room.
What?
Both of this.
You sit in there.
You want to practice then.
But now you want to go downstairs to speak to people,
to distracts all the various distractions.
You want to read a book and a novel.
But you don't want to do it.
You don't do it.
So you're sitting there.
It's pain.
The thing is all the possibilities
and the distractions you can go.
That's all you have.
It's pain of boredom.
It's poor and essential.
And so the best.
So to be appraising right effort,
to be seen that,
seeing that that is the reason that boredom is there.
And maybe investigating it.
Well, the right effort would be basically not going.
Not leaving the room.
Not acting out of fear.
That would be the right effort.
As to what you do on a more particular level,
it would be basically why.
Ask yourself why is there a whole boredom?
Not going out.
Why is it a problem?
Why is it unwanted?
Why does it make you suffer?
And then you realize that it's not about you staying in the room
or not staying in the room.
It's about you suffering.
So you don't want to suffer.
That's why you want to leave the room.
That's why you're going to get distracted.
And that is the core of dumb suffering.
And freedom from it.
So why do I don't want to be touched by the unpleasant feeling?
Why by default I resist that.
Why by default I act upon it.
Why I take it for granted that I must run away from this feeling?
That's all you have to do.
The tiny little thorn needs to be pulled out.
Just a tiny little resistance to pain.
You pull that out.
You won't be touched by anything.
But you certainly won't be pulling anything out.
If you're running away whenever these things and pressure arises.
If you act upon distractions, leave the room, attempt to find duty food
and meaningful sort of things that end up being just distractions,
or whatever.
No, it's my duty to spread the dumb mind.
You know, do the public case, no.
Your duty is to become another hand.
And then whatever you do, or at least sort of another,
then whatever you do will be coming out of the right view.
Even if externally people don't recognize it as such,
that's not your concern.
There is a major need for exiting there.
If you're a pain.
There's fearlessness in it.
Basically, the moment you stop feeling the pain,
you can get up and leave if you want to do that.
Because you won't be rooted in anything out of fear.
So the Buddha wanted to sit down,
but he made sure he removed the fear, and then he said that.
So you can't possibly not do anything for the rest of your life.
You just want to make sure that it's never ever rooted again in an awesome way.
Sometimes, there will be quickly remedied.
Sometimes you might just have to sit in the room and endure it for days.
But you know, that won't last forever either.
It's all about taking for granted the resistance to unpleasant feeling.
That needs to be uprooted.
That tiny little thing needs to be pulled out.
And then all the other past and infection on account of it will be gone.
Eventually it will.
Because it's not being infected anymore.
By death.
Oh, that's healthy.
And the craving for the pleasant.
Well, they are the same.
You crave for pleasure.
Because basically not having enough of that pleasure is unpleasant.
So your whole life revolves around fear of pain.
And even people are going to subject themselves to pain.
Prove themselves that they are not afraid of pain.
They need to prove themselves because underneath that they are afraid of pain.
So they try to override it.
But yeah, because if you're afraid of pain, then you might plot practicing the death.
You might have more reason for becoming a man called...
That is the reason.
That is the sole reason.
I am subject to suffering.
I am like when a layman reflects before he goes thought in the suitors.
I am prey to suffering.
Pray.
So I'm under.
Nothing got me.
Yet.
But the fact that I feel like I'm prey to this suffering means the hunch is there.
Always.
And he might pounce at any moment.
So it doesn't necessarily pounce.
But you recognize that you are actually prey in this field when there are serious carnivores.
So even if they don't kill you, the fate that they might kill you, that is a suffering itself.
That concern, that fear.
So again, I am subject to suffering.
Means I don't necessarily suffer.
But I recognize that if suffering does land at some point, I am subjected to it.
I won't be able to prevent that.
I might be able to deal with it as an aftermath in hindsight.
I might be able to resolve it or whatever.
But the fact that he was touched in the first place, that is the problem.
One and only.
That's it.
And that's what he would have said.
The only thing he could possibly teach is suffering and freedom from it.
Because everything else is done because of that, whether people know it or not.
You pursue pleasure because not having enough of it is pun pleasant.
But then always you realize you never have enough of it.
But then you can pursue it more.
And it's just more and more unpleasure.
You run away from pain.
Why?
Because it's unpleasant.
You're running away from pleasant.
Well, it is unpleasant.
Yeah.
Because you avoided it temporarily.
And then it's like a temporary risk.
Means there is obviously no greater perspective than the wisdom.
Because scratching your itch, temporarily relieved you, but in the long run,
making it much more infected and worse.
Some people would say that people are much more distracted nowadays,
but you know, with funds or whatever internet.
Is it different time?
I think it's just that it's more proliferated, but the roots were the same.
The roots of distraction, they're rooted in the same things.
So people today are more frivolous, probably more divorced from the nature of things
because of that proliferation.
But then nature is still there, which means the roots of the distractions are still the same.
Well, if you want to get things going quick, you want to start to practice,
you want to see the truth and understand reality.
The precepts.
The precepts are restraints.
And then we'll show you the fear quite quickly.
Put down your phone switch of the internet.
Put down your phone switch of the internet.
Well, try and preserve it, but do not try and keep it.
Don't eat like a pig.
Restrain yourself.
Basically, start practicing restraint in regard to your senses,
and all these things will be revealed very quickly.
And then, have to be very careful.
Don't start holding a view.
I can't do that.
And view holding views on the counter is what I said.
Whereby, you know that you don't know,
but you accept that what you're doing now is the right thing.
And then you develop a belief that this is the right thing to do.
But you still don't know for yourself that that's the right thing to do.
That's why we really said that, you know,
monks can live, we'd run from sensuality physically,
and then even mentally.
But then they end up arguing and debating and holding onto views.
And because of that, Mars still controls that.
But again, one thing at a time.
You know, you can't be dealing with the views
if your behavior is still under your strength.
So, with your strength behavior, don't pursue distractions.
And then, in view of the views for a while,
and then they'll become apparent, and you'll know,
then you basically, again, what I was saying,
you stop rooting them in the end also.
Reviews.
Or you kind of help by having views.
So then you just want to know, make sure that you know that
when you have views.
So you know that these are inevitable.
The views are inevitable.
But what I can't do is not hold them blindly
to such an extent that I believe, even if it's about the sea
like the Dharma, it's still not justification
to hold the views in regard to it.
Because that's a...
Yeah, abandoning views.
There's a view that nothing pleases me.
Oh, yeah.
Nothing, yeah.
And that view pleases you.
Yeah, that's the view.
That's what people say, oh, you don't hold 20 fixed views.
Well, that is a fixed view that you clearly hold on to.
So you don't hold the views,
but recognizing the views are inevitable.
That's already okay.
So you do have views, but you don't hold to them.
So that's what it's meant.
Doesn't mean like, don't hold the views like not actually
have any views.
That's impossible.
Even the right views are views.
They just replaces the wrong views.
So that's the most you can...
Well, that's all you can do.
That's all you need to do.
Just replace your wrong views with the right view
and it will lead you to the other hand.
Your wrong attention with the right.
Yeah, exactly.
Right, wrong attention.
But no, because they're all the attention.
I'll never attend anything.
I'll never do anything.
I'll never leave this room for the rest of my life.
Because everything is bad.
No, that's your attention.
Well, that's something you're clearly doing.
You're clearly intending.
You're clearly performing and you're fully not aware of.
But that view in that suit says,
I think it's in Magima 74.
Nothing pleases me.
That first view.
That first view.
That first view.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Because you would...
You would basically...
Nothing pleases me.
You wouldn't commit to any other.
More particular view.
But then, you know,
there is that one that you need to deal with.
But yeah, I don't...
No, I'm not obsessed with...
Existence.
Sorry?
Everything that is...
You know, pulled into it anymore.
Yeah, yeah.
Because the only reason you were pulled into it
was because you were acting out of fear of suffering.
You were prey to suffering
and you were just doing what prey does, running.
So, you know, there might be a hunter behind this tree.
If you don't know,
but you just run.
And then, you know,
when you know there's a child,
you know, there's something...
You might feel something chasing you.
There's a kid in the dark or whatever.
And then you start running out of fear to get quicker to your home.
But once you're given to running,
then you become even more afraid.
And even if there's nothing chasing you,
once you're given to running,
you'll need to run even faster.
Because that's how it works.
It's like an avalanche that you're responsible for.
A flood. A floodgate.
It's open.
