Establishing yourself in the whole state, in that way, staying there, and learning to be composed in there, in the whole state, whatever that whole state must be.
How, let me ask you that, let me ask you that. How are you composed there?
Now, it's how that composure will come to be there. Well, as you were saying, it's been able to see the determination of that person.
The relationship between the two. It requires a discernment of the principle of that relationship. That's what the relationship is.
To even be able to dwell in domain. To be able to properly establish in a state of non-Engla.
Like in this particular example. And that's what people fail to see.
Because, yes, everybody can value silence over talking. We can feel more peacefulness there.
Everybody can see as fast and it requires more determination, more resolve, makes your mind stronger. But none of them sees it in a relationship like silence in a relationship to speaking.
Because if you were to see it, and even when you're not silent, you would be partaking in silence. You wouldn't be affected by speech.
So, if you were to see the proper order, proper relationship between fast phenomenon and fasting in your experience and phenomenon of eating in your experience.
Then, if you might be properly established upon the discernment of that relationship. Not upon the act of fasting. The act of fasting doesn't establish you.
Doesn't establish your mind. That's why the Buddha said that self-mortification won't result in liberation.
So, you need to do it to an extent until you discern the perception of the phenomenon of it.
But, doing it in itself doesn't necessarily, well, for sure, doesn't free you, doesn't do anything for you.
It's discernment of the principle in relation to eating from the point of view of fasting. That's where that knowledge is what establishes your mind.
Then, basically, whenever you're eating, you won't be affected by the eating. You would remain properly established. You won't be pulled by the food. So, you overcome sensuality.
In that example, in the example of state of non-engar, which is really great, even for angry people, it's more common, you're not angry.
It's just when you have the births of anger, that's what you focus on.
So, you can't spend all your time being non-angry and still remain an angry person if you don't discern the principle between non-angry and anger that can then free your mind from anger.
Then, you won't be affected by anger.
What does that mean?
Same, that's the most general, wholesome and unwholesome. All of these things, I'm talking about these examples, would come down to even a more general example, which is wholesome,
abandon everything unwholesome by discerning the relationship between wholesome and unwholesome.
Dependence, dependence, if you want to go higher, if you want to have high wisdom.
Because seeing it gets wholesome is determined by the unwholesome.
On a way, yeah, it is defined by it.
It's defined by it.
So, when you notice that, it leads you higher.
That's what many people are saying in the past, I don't know if you make somebody else think I'm a word of art.
When you start keeping the precepts in the beginning, you have to keep the precepts.
But any of the wisdom starts to be developed through a practice.
Then, you don't keep them, they keep you. And the precepts are not about what the things you should be doing.
It's more about the behaviors that you're not doing. It's the negative aspect, that's what establishes you.
So, it's not you actively holding onto precepts, that kind of gives you a buffer zone and a boundary and a safety net.
It's things that you don't do, that you discern through doing the precepts.
And what are the things that you don't do, unwholesome things? So, it's the negative behavior in regard to unwholesome things.
That's what defines that basis for practice.
It's exactly that thing. You can be wholesome in your life, but not discern relationship in your own home.
Because, in the heart of everything wholesome you do, there is the opposite possibility present as a phenomenon, as something that's not being done at the same time.
So, at the same time, there is something that's done which automatically defines something else as not done.
And that needs to be seen, because if you see that the thing that you don't do, and your mind that this signs it, then that becomes your establishment.
And then you don't have to do even what you were doing in order to maintain that establishment.
Now, it's simply you're not having to do anything is what establishes you. So, it's effortless.
I'm not doing unwholesome. Not having to do unwholesome, but basically by discerning that you're not doing unwholesome, you don't have to do wholesome.
That's what I'm saying. That's how you get established.
By not discerning that you're not doing unwholesome, you have to actively keep doing wholesome, which means you don't go beyond the two.
And by discerning what I'm talking about, you should discerning. That's how you're going to be on good and evil, as they would say.
So, by discerning that you're not doing evil, you don't have to do good.
You could say, if you're getting it to establish your mind or matter, kindness, that's really not good.
You establish matter by discerning the phenomenon of not engaging with the phenomenon of ill will.
So, by doing not ill will, or other by not doing ill will, you establish loving kindness automatically.
You're not emulating all of fabricating or cultivating actively loving kindness.
No, you do it in a negative way, in a sense of its recognition of negative things, of things that are not done.
That's what I mean by negative.
That's automatically that, which is not included in that, which is not done, is what's done.
Because, in that example, kindness, if I wanted to develop kindness, and then I went out and, or what I kind of things to do, okay, smile at people, say good morning,
and then you have to stay at the end of the final where you can help them. That's very different. That's a very different.
That is better to do than being rude to be.
So, that's the first step.
If somebody engages in ill will, it's good that they start doing the actual kindness.
By doing the actual kindness, they can start discerning that they're not doing the ill will.
The more they descend, the phenomenon of ill will and their lack of engagement with it.
The greater they get established in the opposite, which is non-air will, which is automatically kindness.
So, then they don't have to keep bringing acts of kindness and emulating kindness in order to get the state of phenomenon of kindness,
because they automatically have it through the state of non-air will, that they have established.
So, that's what I mean. You have to start fasting a bit or restraining yourself in regard to the food.
To then recognize that the state of non-heating is actually more fundamental than the state of eating.
You spend far more time not eating than eating.
You spend more time not engaging food than engaging food.
Yet, you give all the practice to the food. When the food is the food.
So, you can have that in theory as much as you like, but you won't descend the principle until you actually start fasting to a degree.
Restraining yourself, not constantly just chugging the food down the throat.
Because then, you can start discerning that principle. Once you descend the principle, then yeah, you're going to have to keep holding on to your fasting and stuff,
because you will automatically be restraining in regard to the food.
That's basically the whole point of Sila. That's exactly the nature of it, and how you overcome it as a factor.
Sila, about the Paramahasa, needs to be taken.
But it is a factor.
But it's a better factor than the factors of sensuality and everything else.
So, you replace initially so that you can come out of it.
And a solid burner would overcome Sila, about the Paramahasa.
But what I'm telling you now, basically, but this description.
By taking it, in order to discern the principle in regard to the phenomenon of wholesome, phenomenon of wholesome,
when you are bound by your discernment, your full knowledge of the phenomenon of not wholesome, that's it.
Then you're automatically wholesome, even if you don't actively, need optically, tightly, think about the actual things you must not do and the rules and whatever else.
Then your behavior becomes naturally aligned with the rules.
Give or take, obviously.
But fundamentally, you can't do anything that's truly unwholesome.
In a sense, they will compromise the virtue.
So, you know, an audience in the Suptus would sort of forget about the principle and then they would commit loads of offenses, as they would say, something's grave offenses.
Really, all they would have to do is establish the principle and their purity is back.
That's whether the drunk and the sotpan is just drinking and drinking and not practicing.
And then, oh, he composes man to the end of his life, basically, he recommends which is greater, death for life, death, which is greater, not eating or eating, not eating.
Basically, he recommends that principle, which is greater, not drinking or drinking, which is greater, not sensuality or sensuality.
By recognizing, in mind, as established, sort of, celibacy or non-celibacy, exactly.
Because most people are basically not engaging in non-celibate acts.
Most people would be celibate if you look at their behavior.
In a sense that they are not constantly engaging in sexuality, because, for example, they are not really celibate.
Because the mind is fully bound with centrality.
But you would be celibate, well, first by taking the determination to be celibate, and then by discerning the principle, which is greater, which is more fundamental, and discerning the relationship between the two.
And then, simply, by not engaging in centrality, you are a non-central person.
I, you go beyond centrality.
So, you actually go to guarding the doors of the senses.
So, basically, distraction, sensual distraction.
Non-central, or non-distraction.
Sure, sure, sure.
Non-distraction.
There is a sensual distraction, then there is a distraction that's a non-central distraction.
No, you know, the more the say it is.
And then, there is a non-distraction.
So, you can't just leap from sensual distraction into a complete non-distraction.
You have to replace sensual distraction with a non-central distraction.
Which is basically holding onto views, and you, virtue, and you are celibate, but the Paramahasa would be a non-central distraction.
Because it's still on the level of action.
So, you have to do that in order to replace the variant wholesome, sensual distraction.
By not engaging in sensual distraction by body, by speech, you will eventually be able to not engage by mind.
And you will be able to do so, why?
Because you then abandon.
You overcome the non-central distraction.
So, a non-central distraction cannot enter you.
What can be said for that, which is even inferior to it, which is a sensual distraction that becomes inconceivable.
That's what it meant, like you replaced the grief of the household life with the grief of a renunciation of a life of a monk.
You replaced the joys of household life with the joys of renunciation.
You see it as greater, structurally, fundamentally, phenomenologically greater, as a phenomenon.
It's more fundamental.
And saying, you will be abiding in a noble silence, simply by stopping you mid-sentence, if you want.
You could establish your mind to that point.
Whereby, yeah, you're not in silence when you're talking.
The moment you stop talking, the mind goes back into silence.
Because it never left.
But you can't do that if you never practice silence, if you never practice restraint of your speech.
You've just been chatting and talking more constantly whenever there was an impulse to do so.
But obviously, you certainly won't do that either if you just for the rest of your life refused to utter a word.
That won't necessarily reveal you the principle between speaking and non-speaking.
The verbal determination.
It's you trying to discern the principle, being pointed at it.
That might make you help discern it.
So that's why you can't put the proper practice of downloaded results in wisdom in any method or technique.
Because it's not about what you do.
It's about the recognition between things that you do and you don't do.
And that's neither where you do it nor where you don't do it.
So you can't pin down the practice in a mere mechanical behavior or repetition or avoidance of certain things.
Yeah, avoidance of unwholesome is necessary as a basis.
But that's not the dumb end.
The Buddha was quite clear.
When he said, the Dhamma is not vineyard.
It's not vineyard.
It's as clear as many people have many monks can distinguish that.
They think if there's no vineyard, there's no Dhamma.
Dhamma is not vineyard.
A very clear statement.
Followed by, but there is no practice of Dhamma without presence of vineyard.
Without presence of urch.
So aha, there is something to be understood there.
You understand that, you will be free from silver parmas.
You truly understand it.
Which is basically what I'm expanding on here.
That's what I'm trying to explain.
So your non-sensual behavior needs to become established.
You need to actually do it.
Because by doing a non-sensual behavior,
you kind of the same time do the central behavior.
But then, yeah, you can spend rest of your life.
Your object can focus about your rules and virtue.
And every descendant principle in regard to hold on.
It's not about me doing the virtue.
My virtue is actually defined by not doing the non-virtual.
And that's a completely different thing.
So that's why you can't put the practice into certain meditation
or just watch that to do this or walk like this.
No.
It makes no sense at all.
If it comes down to, if you recognize it actually,
what I'm supposed to do is descend the principle within hold on and hold on.
That's why the Buddha would like to mark up a job
that when she asked him to go on the retreat and give her a brief instruction.
And all he said was, whatever you know is an awesome abandonment,
whatever you know is awesome, cultivated.
So she went in the mountains based on that,
done the retreat and became another.
So you could see that cultivating unhulsing,
sorry, cultivating wholesome means basically cultivating.
It's the descendant, the development, the bhavana, bringing it to being
until it's understood.
Because she wasn't in the mountain and doing charity work
or some other wholesome things that people usually got as good.
No, she was completely secluded.
So when it's said to be cultivating wholesome means yeah,
you don't do unhulsing.
You're already cultivating wholesome.
When you know that that's what you're doing.
If you're unaware of the principle,
then by not doing unhulsing,
you're automatically wholesome.
So you don't have to then do wholesome.
If you don't listen to that principle,
you remain bound by wholesome.
Consequently, you remain bound by unhulsing.
That's why she adherence to the rules and virtue
can result in good rebirth because you've been doing good actions.
But it cannot take you outside of the sphere of karma,
sphere of action.
That's only reserved for those with the right people,
which is where the download begins,
with the right view begins.
So if you was in relation to that,
the system, when people come and ask me questions that
they don't focus, don't think you can put it in a technique or something.
And they say, I find it helpful or something.
It's not your criteria of what's helpful.
It's not right.
Or it's not existing very often.
So what's helpful is just what feels good for most people.
Because if you're adhered to something,
you think this is what I should be doing.
Basically, that's the definition of silabata paramasa.
That's what you end UT.
I need to be doing this.
And that's the first factor.
The first factor that prevents you from becoming another.
So if a person has some transparency,
they'll think, okay, so I can either adhere to this neurotic link
for rest of my life and do this technique and what not.
And remain a putlujena.
Or I can really figure out what it meant by that.
These are the words of the Buddha.
The silabata paramasa, it's basically a definition of
virtue in UT.
It's the first factor.
Is it?
If I just read that,
because you should put each,
please attention to objects,
from pleasure, in the morning, in the afternoon.
And even I read that, I think, I should do that.
Or what is the object of a body?
Do you know what the object is?
Well, you know, take a wholesome.
Exactly.
As opposed to the unwholesome I might do.
Exactly.
So you can call that object as well.
But most people, what is an object?
Well, I don't know.
A smiley face, a clay pot, a Buddha root, or something.
Give me an object.
Give me something, but no.
A recognition of one wholesome,
if that's your present thought,
is the object that you can focus on.
As a result of it,
you will discern the relationship between the wholesome.
That's automatically defined,
simply by not engaging in unwholesome.
So another thing I was thinking about,
is that, in terms of that.
If one sees it,
I'm not engaging in unwholesome acts,
therefore I dwell in wholesomeism.
Quite.
It's a peaceful state,
and I think, too,
it's kind of distilled.
Yeah.
Yeah, I see.
Okay.
Well, one is determined by the other.
But that says that neither are mine.
Yeah.
Exactly.
So.
So I think what is higher then?
What is the higher perception then?
It's what I'm talking about.
It's going beyond good and bad.
So the higher perception is self.
Not so.
Sure.
Fundamentally.
But that is already the result only for the right view.
Not so.
Appetitions can have higher perceptions
in regard to sensuality.
In regard to virtue and duties,
all view padanas,
that they can feel themselves from.
In regard to views.
But they can't have a higher perception
in regard to self and not self.
If they do so,
they'll be from the South of America.
But it is exactly.
That's what I'm talking about.
The discernment of the relationship
of wholesome and wholesome
takes you above wholesome and wholesome.
Takes you above things that you were doing.
Takes you above action.
Which means it cannot be appropriate.
Because only things that you can do are appropriate.
Things on that level are things
that are regarded as mine, for me, as myself.
Things that you can access as even a
rudimental levels of control.
That's that that that sense of
fulfilled is necessary basis for a sense of self.
It is the sense of self.
So when you go beyond the terms of the discernment of
that relationship,
that means that neither that unwholesome,
well, that means that you would see that,
yeah, wholesome is defined by that,
which is not done in terms of unwholesome.
And continually unwholesome
is the absence of wholesome.
So there is no need for you to hold on to anything.
Those things define itself.
That's why it's the terminations.
That's why ignorance of that,
the termination relationships
results in a preparation of things.
That's where VJ is the first.
Non-ignorance of that relationship
results in disarmament of ownership of that relationship.
So you don't know neither good or bad.
We don't have to hold some of our hosts.
We go beyond it.
Because your actions are completely unnecessary redundant.
There is no room for that.
Unwholesome is defined by wholesome.
Wholesome is the absence of unwholesome.
But obviously for as long as your behavior has been engaging
in unwholesome, you've been perpetuating that mistake,
maintaining that mistake in view.
But if you can see self.
And not hold even to yourself.
Then it's automatically not self.
But self is still there, there's something actually not holding.
Well, it's not yourself there.
Because self is defined not but what is there.
Self is defined by weather but there is being held as mine or not.
So by seeing self as something there that means it's already
can be regarded as not mine.
Just see what I mean.
So that's ends of self, there would be there if seen as not self.
Sorry, there's not mine.
First thing needs to be acknowledged is ends of self.
If you deny there's not self, there's not self.
You never see that which is yourself.
Why does that seem?
It's not seen as a phenomenon.
If it's a phenomenon, it's something that has a reason.
If it's something that has a reason, it cannot be that master
behind the horizon, behind the manifestation, that controller.
Why?
Because it's manifest.
It just partakes in the same thing.
It shares the same nature.
It's not mine.
Yeah, but that's possible to see only once.
Yeah, there is higher.
Then.
Then mine.
And self.
So in a way you can use that reflection like which is great
and not mine or mine.
In general.
And what is more?
Things that don't belong to you, things that belong to you.
Of course, things that don't belong to me are far more numerous in this world.
That is greater than things that belong to you.
Then you can use simply that discernment on a quite mundane level in a way
and actually develop your mind and account of it.
Because if you stick to it discerning it, you would see that then whatever is yours,
it's completely gratuitously accidentally solved.
Which means you are not in control of things that are taking to be yours.
Which means, oh, they're not really mine.
Basically, things that are yours are really things that are not yours that are just closer to you.
They're things that are really not not yours.
So it's not like, oh, this is not mine and this is mine.
It's like, this is not mine, not not mine and this is not mine.
But fundamentally, none of it is yours.
All of it is not mine.
But then for an hour and a half.
Not mine. It's higher than that.
Because not mine is opposed to mine.
Yeah, that's what an Aryan needs to keep doing.
That's why he said, not I am, not mine, not myself.
That's the reflection of Aryan needs to be here.
He doesn't even need to do it anymore.
It sees completely notions of mine and not mine.
Notions of course, some of them are false.
Notions of good and bad have gone.
You went beyond.
It's a path he might be on.
So what is the highest determination?
Determination that he, I don't know what I'm trying to say.
What is the highest?
Nibbam is ours.
Yeah, yeah.
What is the highest thing he sees?
This is determined by that.
This is determined by that.
Yeah, that's what he sees.
Well, it's gone.
Determinations have ceased.
Determinations have ceased.
Yes, exactly. Determinations have ceased.
And that's determined by all his previous efforts towards ceasing the terminations.
But that's gone.
That's irreversible.
So there is nothing dependent on...
That's the undetermined.
Nibbana.
Assam kata, yeah.
That's the definition of exactly.
There's nothing dependent on anything anymore.
Nothing taken as mine.
Anywhere, anywhere in any manner.
And I say before, oh, come on.
It was the better we could.
Mine anymore.
No, no.
He doesn't need to say it.
Yeah, exactly.
And about life and death.
So, would you say that?
Here's life.
Here's activity.
Or what is higher than that?
What is greater than that?
Yeah, death.
Death would be more fundamental.
Yeah.
Because if life would be full, more fundamental,
death would just not be manifested today.
See, but there's something different as, like, say, with anger and don't anger.
Well, it's different because it kind of involves you in your entirety.
Anger and not anger offers you some perspective.
It's kind of, but this is life and not life.
So, I can't stop doing life.
Life and death are basically on the level of nibbana and not nibbana.
Determine.
Determine and undetermine.
Yeah.
But in the same manner, I say, like, the fact,
if you recognize that you can die at any moment,
then your whole life,
anything you pass, your future, your hopes, everything, your fears, your desires,
everything, everything, your family, everything,
it just becomes quite insignificant.
Because you don't know.
It's the whole go away and you cannot possibly prevent it in any manner.
If you truly contemplate death, you realize how circumstantial your entire life is.
There is no greatness or priority of your own or certain personal life.
Completely, it could have been otherwise.
That's the recognition.
I'm like, oh, the one that the Buddha created is already.
It could not be for me.
It will not be for me.
And then the Buddha corrected in saying,
you won't be for me.
It will not be for me.
As in the greatest of the potuginous views,
they would have said, it could have not been for me.
Which is kind of, basically, almost a month, the entire life.
You don't quite get the whole relationship thing between the Sankara and Sankata down,
between the determined.
But you can abandon a lot.
But the one who gets the rest,
he will say, it will not, if not for sure,
then in the future won't be for him, because there is no room for the ownership
in the present, not in the past, not in the future.
So he corrects that statement just slightly.
Like, from a first person to a third person,
I have to go out in a long time.
