So this is from the shorter note on Dhamma.
The word Dhamma, in its most general sense, is equivalent to thing, i.e. whatever is distinct
from anything else, more precisely, is what the thing is in itself, as opposed to how it
is in the footnote to that reads, how a thing is a matter of structure, that is to say of
intentions, chaitana, or determinations, sankara.
These are essentially negative, whereas Dhamma is positive.
So in terms of that, he's distinguishing what a thing is, versus how a thing is, but it may
not be obvious that those are two things that can be distinguished in the first place, so
to speak.
I was wondering if you had anything to comment or add about how you would discern a thing
from its determinations, so to speak.
Well, okay, so that's where you only saw Manasakara comes in, basically knowing how to attend
a thing without making it another thing, without making it a different thing.
So in this particular passage you read, Dhamma is anything that has a nature to manifest
itself.
So a feeling, a thought, a perception, a memory, it doesn't matter.
If it's a reason experience as such, it's a thing, it's a Dhamma.
So you will discern then what that thing is determined by simultaneously being able to
discern what's present there within that thing that it isn't that thing.
Now the problem is this requires quite a refined, as in proper way, of attending to the fundamental
core of the arisen thing.
That's why Journeys, Manasakara, Journeys, so literally means womb, means going back
to the womb, attending to the womb of the arisen thing, that it's simultaneously their
present, attending to its base.
That's what proper attention means in the suttas.
The problem that people have is if that proper attention is not developed and trained and
discerned, what you're going to do is when there is a, say, a thing A has arisen, instead
of seeing through it into not A, still within A, but not that A, people, when they look,
they overlook, so then they see B, and B is just another thing.
And when they look for the Sankara for the determination of the experience B, well they
see C, which means they're not seeing these things simultaneously present, they're following
them in time, they're following them linearly or logically.
And that's why they can't understand the true nature of Sankara, because if a person
would understand that, that's the beginning of Patitsang Pada.
So the present experience of such and such nature, without abandoning that experience,
without over-intending it, without under-intending it, you want to discern peripherally in regard
to the present experience, what else is there?
That's what I meant in the previous video about Kama, when I said the intentionality
behind your actions, the degree of those intentions it's given beforehand as options,
and that's not what you're doing, nor it is your responsibility.
Not being able to see it on that level, you will automatically appropriate it, overly
intended, which means make it mine, which means result in acting out of it.
So if you want to discern the determination of the present, there is an experience of
Dama, you need to see it within that present experience of Dama.
That's why every Patitsang Pada starts with this, this is, with two simultaneous present
things, because yes, when you look at Sankara's individually, not in the context of determining
Dama, there are also things, which means there are also Damas, as the Buddha described that,
when he was describing the five aggregates.
But you don't want to look for the content of Sankara, or the content of Dama, you want
to see the relationship between Dama, and that which determines it, which is not Dama,
that particular Dama.
So you want to see the relationship between A, and that which is simultaneously present,
that it's not that A, but not B either.
So by not giving into A, but not making it into B, by not confusing the two, you get
to understand how A is presently determined, presently a reason with presently a reason
causes as well.
And that's why when they ask the Buddha, he says, how did you cross, he said, you can't
cross the shore by fighting the waves, by pulling backwards, by standing still.
So how did you cross the shores, by not fighting the waves, by not pulling backwards, by not
standing still?
He has crossed the stream, the river.
But the problem people have is, because it's a form of fighting the wave, over intending
it.
Because there is in Dama A, I look for its cause as in I'm looking for B, to determine
A.
And that's what most people misunderstood, but it's own bother.
They think it's an explanation of the life of the three life stages and so on.
They think it's laid out in time from A, B, C, D, E, E, F, G, and so on.
But it isn't.
It's always, always starts with the present there isn't principle of with this, this
is, that's it.
And then the Buddha would elaborate differently within the same principle, depending on who
he was teaching.
But sometimes, but it's a part of describing twelve factors, sometimes in eight, sometimes
in sixteen, it doesn't matter.
What matters is, the simultaneous principle, the principle of simultaneous dependence.
And if you want to see what A depends upon, you can't look for B, you have to look within
A, which it is a name.
So it's about letting Dama's endure and then not looking elsewhere.
No trying to explain the Dama, as, no trying to explain there is a thing, but allowing
it to arise and allowing it to persist and endure and while it persists and endures,
you get to see what else is there within it that determines it.
And that's not that Dama, it's some kind of that Dama.
But if you look at B, well then you need to look now to, to find its own Sankara within
that B, not like start drawing connections between A and B and then provide an explanation
to yourself what the determination is.
So this is going on to the next paragraph now, so it's Sabei Sankara Nitya, Sabei Sankara
Nitya, Sabei Dama Anata.
All determinations are impermanence, all determinations are unpleasurable, all things are not self.
Ata self is fundamentally a notion of mastery over things, but this notion is entertained
only if it is pleasurable, it is only pleasurable provided the mastery is soon be permanent
for mastery, which is essentially a kind of absolute timelessness unmoved moving of things
as undermined by impermanence is no mastery at all but a mockery.
Thus regarding of a thing, A-Dama as Ata or self can survive for only as so long as the
notion gives pleasure and it only gives pleasure for so long as that Dama can be considered
as permanent for regarding a thing as self and dows it with the illusion of the kind of
super stability in time.
In itself as a Dama regarded as Ata, its impermanence is not manifest for it is pleasant
to consider it as permanent, but when it is seen to be dependent upon other Dama, not
considered to be permanent, its impermanence does then become manifest.
To see impermanence in what is regarded as Ata, one must emerge from the confines of
the individual Dama itself and see that it depends on what is impermanence, thus Sabe
Sankara, Nattana, Anicha is said, meaning all things that things Dama depend on are
impermanent.
A given Dama as a Dama regarded as Ata is not account to being so regarded, considered
to be pleasant, but when it is seen to be dependent upon some other Dama that not being
regarded as Ata is manifestly unpleasurable owing to the invariable false perception
of impermanence of super stability in one not free from the conceit I am, then its own
unpleasurableness becomes manifest, thus Sabe Sankara, Nattana, Nuka is said, when this
is seen, i.e. when perception of permanence and pleasure is understood to be false, the
notion this Dama is my Ata comes to an end and is replaced with Sabe, Dama and Ata.
So before you ask the question, just to add to that, that's a commonly kind of mis-misread
with people say, oh yeah, the Buddha said all things are impermanent, all things are suffering,
all things are not self.
That's what I mean when you kind of overly intend and basically use Dama that ends up
being an explanation, just provides an explanation that everything is impermanent and everything
is not yours and everything is not yourself.
But if you read, if you look at the Pali, it doesn't say that, it says all the terminations
are impermanent, all the terminations are suffering, all things are not self.
So that's what I was discussing just a few seconds ago, that difference in the simultaneous
the present things on a different level, as in the present Dama, present self is determined
by present things that are within it that cannot be the self at the same time.
So go on now.
In simpler terms, if a person can make a contemplation out of it, again, to do general things, things
are mine because I am, but it's out of the way around.
It's because you keep taking things to be for me, you keep assuming that you are.
So appropriation of as mine comes first, structurally, not temporary, which means you can't have
sense of self without a sense of ownership being present there, simultaneously with that
sense of self.
And that's why for somebody who has understood the Dama sort of on a higher, they have abandoned
that Atavada, but they still have a degree of conceit, they would respond to a degree
of appropriation that they still maintain in regard to things, but ultimately, of course,
they're heading towards complete freedom from it.
So in practical terms, if a person wants to contemplate, just take your body, for example,
don't take some random objects because you might, well, it's a subtle thing to understand,
so you want to try as accurate as possible, you want to start as accurate as possible,
and the most accurate, the most factual thing that you have is your body.
And that is something, your senses, that is something that everybody automatically appropriates
in regards to his mind, and things that I am.
Like I can see here taste touch because I am, it's actually out of the way around, it's
because you keep seeing, hear me tasting, touching your song, you think you are, as in
you think you are the owner of that.
So if a person wants to undermine that sense, you can't just start explaining to yourself
that this body is impermanent and use like medical jargon and so on, because it assumes
this external point of view, no, you need to feel that impermanence right through the
heart of that ownership, and how you do it, you do it by allowing the ownership to arise.
This body right here, that's present right now, sitting on the chair, talking to you,
answering your questions.
Can I have this present body here answering questions, sitting on the chair in this forest?
Can I do that without this simultaneous muscle inside of my chest, the heart beating and
pumping blood, without oxygen being pumped around my body, would I be able to operate?
Without my lungs being able to breathe air, would I be able to operate?
I wouldn't, which means any sense of ownership, master intentionality that I might exhibit
is directly determined, simultaneously determined, or rather determined by the simultaneous
presence of these other functioning things that I cannot control, because you can't
even conceive how it would be to tell your heart to stop, and it would be just completely
involuntary.
It's an involuntary muscle, which means it just works on its own, yet your whole life
depends upon it.
Now many people might think that, contemplate the heart and impermanence of it, but you
don't want to contemplate it, as I said before, after or before, you want to contemplate it
right through the present thing of this appropriation of this body.
In another video I was talking about, like the simile, the simile of the chariot, how
people say, it's made out of parts, that is not real.
No, you want to see the parts through the existing phenomenon of the whole.
So the contemplation of body parts will work only, as in it will result in dispassion and
freedom from suffering, and this owning of your own body and your own sense of self,
which means it will result in anata, contemplation of parts will result in that, if you see it
within the presently arisen basis of this appropriated body.
So this body that I am, this sentence that I'm talking, this situation that I'm in control
of, can be undermined at any second by the beating heart if it stops to pump, that's
it.
I cannot continue existing if these parts that comprise this entire body, if these parts,
if they stop functioning, if they are dismembered, if they fail, none of which you can control.
So recognition of that, of those determinations of those parts, recognition of that, it's,
they are basically impermanent.
Why?
Because you know, they might be working now, but they cannot possibly work like this in
this particular arrangement forever, it's just inconceivable.
So that's the first recognition of impermanence, which then in itself, well this, this cannot
be pleasurable, because pleasant notion is the notion of eternity, it's going to be unchanged
forever, stable.
And if you experienced the heart of your ownership as impermanent and unpleasurable, you disown
it automatically.
That's also another thing I want to say.
So a person who starts discerning Sabes, Sankara, Anicia, Sabes, Sankara, Dooka, they
don't need to then go in our case, or Saba, Dama, Anata.
No, their experience will automatically become Dama, Anata, Saba, Dama, Anata.
It will be automatically experienced as not my self.
This sense of self, this body, this situation, by being actually fundamentally rooted in
that which is completely outside of my reach or control, undermines the ownership of this
very situation.
Thus, situation remains unchanged in a way, but then everything changes because the ownership
of it has been removed.
That's why Arahant cannot be necessarily recognized externally.
He still acts, talks, and does stuff normally like everybody else does.
But there is no ownership of any part of that.
Thus, there is no any conceit or sense of self.
So as a girl, as the example you gave of seeing your bodily situation that you find yourself
in, determined by the presence of, let's say, the heart.
What is the way to bring your mind to this without making the presence of your heart
a B, as we said before?
Yeah, exactly.
Without overattending it, and then making a presence of your heart another thing that
now you're not seeing that the relationship of the termination anymore.
Well, the thing is, again, you must not become a mindful of how you feel in this present
situation.
So the present situation being felt, right here, right now, to this extent, pleasant
and pleasant neutral, and then just start not allowing your mind to approach the notion
of a pumping heart as a determination, not allow your mind to approach it as an afterthought
or as before or as maybe as an explanation, but actually go through that situation that's
being felt.
And for most people, it's going to result in anxiety and concern, which is the inevitable
beginning.
That's why in the suit as you did when people came to the Buddha and they asked him, what
is he teaching?
He would explain the notself when they would fall on the ground beating their breast and
pulling their hair in despair.
That's because they generally understood what he was teaching.
But obviously, they did not let go of the notion of self, hence they experienced terror
and they started, they would shout or this will kill us, this will destroy us, this will
obliterate us, because they did actually understand what he was referring to.
So then they misunderstood something, you wouldn't be that afraid.
That's why Sila needs to come first, mindfulness and restraining the danger in the slightest
fault, because they will keep you together from falling onto the ground and beating your
breast and becoming desperate.
So is that that's in a matter of the only so much, far of determining that way to...
Determining the presently, determining the present determination within the present there
isn't a thing.
So while the thing is present, you determine the determination within it.
Not before or after.
So while this body here, which is automatically taken is mine, without overthinking, without
making a separate experience of a thought of my pumping heart, but stay with the thought
of this present experience, peripherally, I discerned dependence that this experience
has upon a random beating muscle of a heart, heart muscle, that's it.
And then you'll feel it, you'll start feeling it.
And when you start feeling it, you'll know you're doing it right.
