So can you describe the four Noble Truths and the Buddha's teachers, suffering is the
first number, because there is suffering. Second, there is the cause of suffering. Third,
cessation of suffering and fourth, and path, the cessation of suffering.
Well, first and foremost, there are four descriptions or four aspects of one insight.
That insight being freed from suffering, basically. A few free from suffering,
then already implies the knowledge of what suffering is, that already implies the knowledge of
what has been causing that suffering, that already implies the knowledge of freedom of suffering,
and that already implies knowledge how to maintain that freedom from suffering, that insight.
Well, how to develop it? Well, okay, yeah, how to maintain, which we basically then result in a
complete liberation from all the upperclass and all the other kind of solutions.
So it's not like one, two, three, four, that a person needs to discern one by one.
It's basically suffering and freedom from it.
And that's what, you know, in many sources, it's mentioned basically, it would be only,
it would only be talked about, about the cause of suffering. And cause of suffering is,
nothing else except craving. And that's, again, that's something that
the people might read over, and then maybe you just like seem like it's, oh, it's making sense
of course, but actually, in terms of the direct insight, seeing the craving is suffering
results in liberation from that suffering. Seeing the craving means abandoning the craving.
The only reason you crave is because you don't really see it directly, you don't understand it,
you haven't discern it. And, yeah, the burden, I suppose, is to recognize that whenever
there is suffering present, you can then say, you can reduce correctly that the craving must
be present because the suffering is there. So it's not, oh, I suffer, now I have to look for the
reason, call it craving or something else, or also assuming that sometimes something else can
be the cause of your suffering. Really needs to be brought on so narrowly and so precisely,
whereby you discern when the suffering, the disagreeable unpleasant feeling that you're
resisting basically, when the suffering is present, means it because simultaneously with it,
there is craving present. The absence of that craving, simultaneously means the absence of
that suffering. There is no delay. That's why you can have the direct knowledge of freedom from
suffering directly verified for yourself. Oh, you cannot suffer and meet suffering as the
Buddha would often say. Literally, amidst things that used to make you suffer, the mind cannot
suffer now because there is no more craving in regard to those things. How to abandon craving?
How to abandon craving? Well, sensory strength, virtue, developed to the extent necessary,
whereby you start discerning then your mental intentions, whether they're rooted in
wholesome and wholesome, whether they're rooted in greed, aversion, delusion. And when you know
that they are, you do not engage in them. You do not tolerate them, you do not entertain them,
you do not proliferate, you do not invest in them. That would basically enable the mind to then
not resist the unpleasant feeling, to not indulge the pleasant feeling, to not try to distract
yourself from a neutral feeling. And when the mind stops doing that, with the previous knowledge that
it has heard from outside through the sutras and the right teaching, when the mind stops doing that
with the previous knowledge of what craving is, you'll be able to see, ah, this is the absence of
craving. And you will be able to see right there, ah, there is no suffering. And then you will
also be able to understand what that suffering was, even the suffering of the past, before he
understood the way out. He wouldn't be suffering on account of that either. The same knowledge will
be applied to the present, past and the future.
So then how to endure those painful feelings? Do you have them now? Painful feelings, cravings, how do you?
Well, you endure them basically, if instead of enduring, you want to give into centrality,
or you want to give into a will, or distraction, while you don't do that, then that will result in
you having to endure them. But sometimes if, ah, you can sort of, you don't have to endure them,
without having to give into centrality, aversion, or delusion, then that's fine as well.
So you don't have to just constantly going looking for pain to endure. They've been not necessarily
resultant wisdom. How does one know that you're free from craving? How do you know that you?
Because there's no suffering, I mean suffering. There's no suffering because you cannot suffer,
not because you're hiding away from it, or because you're not, you're just avoiding things that
would use to, they would use, they used to cause you to suffer. Because like avoiding things means
you're afraid of something already. Like say, I don't know, a person doesn't leave their
cutie because they don't want to talk to anyone because he might annoy them and they'll suffer.
So they're not free from suffering. They're just protecting their precarious environment,
often on disturbance. But the fact that you must protect it means you're disturbed by that,
which means they're not truly not suffering. They're just hiding away from the greater extent of it.
So you want to record, that's why like a conscious monkey doesn't neglect his duty.
Like certain things that you must do, they are not necessarily connected just to sitting in a
solitude and practicing, you know. Like here, we live by ourselves, we do things ourselves,
so we, you know, we have to go and fix the waterline. I have to go and patch my thing. I mean,
I don't have to, but then I won't have any water. But having to do that doesn't bother you either.
You're not seeking out as a distraction, but you're not running away from it when it arises on
its own as something that's necessary to be done to sustain the way you live it.
So you need to have, again, that self honesty, so you know you're not hiding away, you're not
indulging, you're not covering anything up. With that self honesty and all the restraint of the
senses, seeing the danger in the slightest fault, moderation in eating, the result just in
obviously being mindful of your actions. You start discerning mental intentions,
by discerning them basically, the mind is already developing a certain perspective because
there is no craving without intention, but there is intention without craving. That's why our
hunt can still intend and decide and choose, but he has no craving. But in order to see that,
you have to see the intentions to begin with. Most people are not even aware of the mental
intentions. They think intention is just the most obvious choice, but it's not. It's just
little inclinations, thoughts in themselves are already intentional. So it's subtle, and in order
to reach a subtle level, this whole sensory restraint, restrained by the party mocha, by the virtue,
moderation eating, mindfulness is not, it's absolutely necessary, it's not negotiable.
And with the right instruction and the right way of looking, that's where the practice is.
With the other right instruction, it is just restraint, which is good, but it doesn't lead you
to any knowledge. But with the right instruction and that, that's all you need.
Because sometimes people might think, okay, the restraint is not the dama, that's true.
And then they would think, okay, well, now I got the dama, so I don't have to restrain, no.
Like dama applies only where the restraint is. So you can see, yeah, restraint is not the dama,
as in the application of the dama, is not the same as the necessary basis for that application,
but you wouldn't be able to apply it if there is no necessary basis. And if the mind practices
like that, then the inclination in form of craving is becoming more and more obvious. Why?
Because you start recognizing that the certain ways when you intend an incline,
makes you suffer, makes you feel too much, so to speak, makes you too involved, exposes you,
makes you liable. By discerning those things, you stop intending like that.
By not intending like that, you're not perpetuating the craving.
It's in terms of feelings. Oh, yeah, so it's all, of course, it's always in relation to feelings.
Yeah. So in an agreeable feeling that is present, you have to sort of discern the inclination,
towards wanting more of it, or towards wanting to stay longer, or wanting to not go away so soon,
or towards wanting to increase it, to intensify it, to prolong it, any of those things.
In a disagreeable feeling, be the general disagreeable mood, or something more specific,
you have to remove, or rather discern, and by discerning, you remove, and automatically,
the inclination towards resisting it, towards trying to find the justification for it,
which was trying to find an explanation for it, towards psychologizing it. Just any of those things
are mechanisms which you try to engage in, so to remove it, get rid of it.
And the subtlest of them is the neutral feeling when it's neither pleasant nor unpleasant,
and that's when people give into distraction, delusion, indolence, laziness,
like mental, mental, heedlessness.
So if you don't do any of those three things, you're not prepared to do it in craving.
And at the same time you could be able to feel, to be aware of your feelings.
Oh yeah, of course. To the extent that they have a reason on their own,
because feelings arise having a reason they cease on their own, you're not saying that.
So you want to be, again, that's where mindfulness of feeling is discerning the nature basically.
Knowing that they have a reason on their own, this pleasant experience at the moment,
as a reason on its own basically, that's fine, so you don't keep,
I must get rid of it, because pleasure means craving, no, it doesn't.
Leaning too much towards that pleasure means craving.
Leaning away from the disagreeable means craving.
Leaning towards forgetfulness and distraction and
leaning towards forgetfulness and distraction.
That means craving in the neutral feeling.
It's already been aware of those leanings towards feeling sleep, yeah, that's a good way to start.
So you can't like having, oh this is my craving, because craving is in your attitude,
but you can bring it down so precisely wherever you would see,
either the presence of suffering, or the presence of the possibility to suffer, any of those
is generated by the amount of you leaning. You'll automatically generate impossibility to
suffering, which is in itself Dukha. So you use that to know whether you lean or not,
a recognition of how liable to suffering does this make you.
There's no method that's going to show you that. Of course not, because method is on the level
almost like bodily action, or certainly bodily perceptions where you're just sort of
perceiving or going through some motions. This is what we're talking about the intentions behind
your actions. So whatever method you do you have to look at the intention behind which means method
becomes redundant, which means method is your sealer. Method is your sensory strength,
that's as close as the method as you can get. Method is your moderation in eating.
There's no that's noting every movement of your mind,
critically righted down. It's completely misplaced, looking at the wrong place.
Because you're not seeing your intention to note, because you couldn't be noting your intention to note.
Noting is an action which is already intended, which is already leaned towards,
and you're not seeing that, by not seeing that no amount of engaging in the
interaction with the reveal. Otherwise the Buddha wouldn't give in a method and describe it in
the sutras. When they did ask him what's the direct method he said, a young man develops faith,
leaves his home, lives restrained by the rules of patimoca, practices sensory strength, sees
the danger in the slightest fault, moderates anything and devotes his time basically to wakefulness.
First watch of the night, second watch of the night, third watch of the night, and then he understands
that the rebirth has been sort of destroyed. And I remember the first time I read that as a layman,
I was also looking for a method and I thought was this is just a general, why wouldn't he just give
you a particular recipe how to become a light, because there isn't any. This is the most particular
you can get. If you're not seeing it in a direct manner, it's just because all of the wrong views
they're gonna tell away. So you need to meet that Buddha's instruction halfway, basically,
or even two thirds of a way, to start to make sense. But if person don't change an interview,
then they just add, on top of their views, their notion of other practices, that's what you get.
Methods and modern repersonal techniques and whatnot. All methods of concentration and so on.
Now you have to look at the intention behind actions and you can't concentrate on that,
because it's behind your concentration. You can discern it, you can know it. That's
where it's at, the consciousness is to be fully understood. Not to concentrate it on.
So you can't be aware of your intention. You can be aware in that peripheral background manner,
but awareness and concentration in terms of techniques is not the same thing. People are not aware
when they're doing meditation technique, while they're opposite. They're practicing some sort of
focusing exercise on one thing or the other, which means there's no general awareness there.
To be able to see your intentions. They can only be seen indirectly.
By the way, you are, well, whatever you're choosing. They can only be seen indirectly
on the basis of your sensory strain and see life. You can't see them indirectly if you're on
restraint. If you're not keeping the strength, you're not keeping the seal that you know that you are intending.
I'm asking you intentions. I mean, yeah, you can have a notion of it to some extent, but like
understanding the nature, like having, having that clarity generated to the point of being able
to fully discern it, you won't have that. It is. It's like trying to collect the water in,
I don't know, 10 meter deep pool tank. We're just constantly punching hole at the bottom of it.
So it will never fill up to the bottom, to the top. And you need to have it filled up, basically.
