So I was wondering about unhulsing and hulsing because you say that our faults are caused
by acting unhulsing. So to overcome one's faults and let unhulsing behaviour which
becomes self-transparent or authentic in regards to one's intentions, this is not so easy
to do. The transparency, to be constantly watchful of your intentions while you go about
your daily life is quite difficult. Sure, but is this the correct way?
Well, the first point I would address would be, you mentioned it, the things of faults
or things can be regarded as a fault if it's rooted in greed, aversion or delusion. So that
basically a definition of a fault. So even if something is universally accepted, socially
accepted to be done and normal, if it's rooted in greed, aversion, delusion, from the
point of view of development in your mind, that is unhulsing. So that's where this self-transparency
in regard to the motives behind you wanting to do things. That's why that self-transparency
is necessary. It's necessary as a basis and then actually it is necessary or rather you
don't have to look for anything other than that basis to develop your mind. In other words,
the criteria that you will be using to develop the self-transparency is the criteria you
can use all the way to complete development of your mind, that transparency. So it is definitely
something to be done starting from your bodily actions that you start developing
whatfulness and mindfulness in regard to things you want to do in your body and see where
is that action rooted or where would it be rooted. Why do I want to do this? So initially
you might have to kind of do it excessively in terms of interrogating yourself, but once
that attitude becomes established, you don't have to think about the questions. Why am I doing
this? Just looking at it would be already a form of investigating the motivation, which
means just by looking at it you would be seeing where it is rooted at. So if you want to
do something with your body in terms of I want to go somewhere or I want to eat something
or I want to be working or whatever, you have to ask yourself why. Why do I want to do
this? Then you might say, well, because other people need my help. I was like, okay, so
then go further. So why are you the one in the position of giving your help to others?
And so on. Doesn't mean like you have to classify this, oh, this is good or this is bad.
All you want to do is just be fully transparent when it comes down to knowing why you are doing
whatever you're doing. Because that's how you will start to sieve out many, many unwholesome
things. The people end up doing habitually because they never look at the reasons why
they're doing them. So they just go with it. And then that ends up proliferating and
getting worse and worse. And then people acquire all sorts of habits and unwholesome things,
sensuality and ill will just because they never really looked at it, never saw themselves
doing it. You can put it that way. So going to watch a movie. Okay, yeah, that's a kind
of, it's a neutral example. There's nothing in, nothing moral about watching a movie. There
is nothing even ethically wrong to go and watch a movie. But if you had somebody who wants
to develop their mind in terms of complete freedom from suffering or things of the
pretend to the down of practice, then yeah, like you can say, oh, everybody watches the
movie. It's fine. And then pretend that that's it. That's all to it. And then go and watch
a movie. Oh, you can ask, well, everybody's not me and everybody's not practicing for
me. So why am I going to do it? Why? Why do I want to do it? And if you discovered that
motive behind you is just a distraction, because it feels a bit too heavy being alone
or something, and then you want to go out and watch a movie. And it is, well, as I said,
it's nothing immoral. But from the ultimate point of view of freedom of the mind, freedom
of the mind from the senses, that is, that is an obstacle because you are giving into
the distraction. You want to distract yourself. You want to, you want to engage in an attitude
of delusion, of non-transparency, because it's, it's a bit too boring to just be all the
car mindful or something like that. And then you give into it. But if your focus, so like,
you know, somebody might hear this and say, okay, so I'll never watch a movie again. No,
that's not a point. The point is you should never forget about the reasons why you do things.
And that principle, that attitude, will straighten things out in itself. Because if you're never
transparent, sorry, if you're always transparent, means you can't delude yourself anymore,
which means sooner or later you start feeling guilty for constantly distracting yourself.
And if you don't compromise the attitude of transparency, then that guilt will be enough
to keep you away from things effortlessly. So yes, initially you might need to restrain
yourself and say no to things, but that in itself won't lead to any understanding of the nature
of things. You develop in self-transparency in regard to it, that might.
