It's hard to practice noble silence by not engaging in any distracting behavior by practicing
wakefulness. So anything that you discern that it's rooted in an unnecessary desire to distract
yourself, to take your mind away from your present situation and your mindful off, that's
basically against the practice of wakefulness. But it's also important to note it's not
like you don't need to be forcing your mind like I'm present I'm present because your
present where you want to be or not, it's not an option. It's not an option, it's not
optional. Lots of mindfulness, lots of wakefulness, all these things are rooted in basically
unwholesome intentions which means you cannot become un-wakeful, non-wakeful if you don't
engage in any intentional act based on greed andversion delusion. So if the mind's intentions
are not rooted in any of the unwholesome things, that you cannot be un-wakeful. And that's
already a noble silence, you're not distracted. This means you never speak to anyone or you
never do anything whatsoever. You just don't do things that are rooted in desire of greed,
aversion or distraction and delusion. Why is it silence? Because the mind quives
down. When the mind is distracted, the thoughts, the verbal thoughts, the kind of dialects,
it's going on, the whole dialectic of thinking. But once you haven't been, and again people
who are going to stop this thinking, well you can't stop the thinking. You can quiet
it down by seeing basically the thinking, the loud thinking, so to speak, is a symptom
of your lack of your proper restraint, not restraining your mind in a proper manner in
a sense of not delighting in the last version of delusion, resisting delusion, resisting
the version and engaging in distraction and delusion. But if you start discerning that,
that's what quiet is the mind down. You can't know, I'm on my mind quiet, I focus on
my nostrils and I'll be quiet. No, you just fall asleep most likely. Or going some
state of like focused attention to something, but again, you just lost the awareness and
the mindfulness completely, which is not different than if you fell asleep. So you want
to see basically that the problem is not in you not trying hard enough to be in the
present moment, which is again, not the matter of choice. The problem is you're not understanding
the nature of intentions enough, but not understanding it, you don't know when they are rooted
in greed or a version of delusion, you have no idea. You're just guessing, sometimes
you guess you're right, sometimes you don't, but you don't see that, which means you're
going to have a very reason. So the mind will quiet down when the physical
restraint and seal has been developed. The verbal, you know, verbal actions are kept in
check. And then mentally, you just don't give, don't give in to the like presented
options of centrality or a version or distraction. If you don't, just don't give in to those.
If they are not those, that's fine. You don't have to be a harmless, be mindful not. You
are already mindful, but not giving in. You're already mindful, mindful, because you're
already abstaining from certain types of mental intention, which are the unwholesome types.
So basically, things you don't do, that's what becomes your present activity in that
negative sense. That's why it's not on a level of doing or on a level of technique.
You can't be doing the abstaining from this thing. No, it's just discerning certain things
that you won't be giving into. Then everything else, it's not those things, that's fine.
That's why the Buddha, even when he was sort of instructing mind's heart to understand
the jhana and establish the mind in jhana, he would say, he would say, don't like fear
every pleasant experience, because they had the attitude of whatever's pleasant is a problem.
It should be dismissed, so they were interfering with things they shouldn't have. Because
if it's agreeable and not deluded in desire or version of delusion, it's not a problem.
And you're assuming that you go away, well it's you overstepping your jurisdiction,
you interfering with that, which is not yours.
So some people might think that locking themselves into a situation of solitude, no distraction,
no TV, it's just being like a prisoner basically, not a jail, solitude, solitude, solitude,
confinement. But most people in that situation go mad, don't stop thinking, no, no, it's
not. Again, if a person knows what they're doing, as in they understand the nature, they
can discern the nature of their, that indirectly, the nature of their intentions, they can see
when they're rooted, then yes, solitude will just result in further clarity. That's
why the Buddha would encourage monks, provided already had the right view and establishment
in sealer and restraint, to go in the jangular remodeling, not socialize, even without
the monks and so on. But if you don't have that knowledge, then well again you might sort
of use it while keeping a notion in your mind that you must develop knowledge. But sometimes
people forget that and then they try to get the circumstances to do the work for them.
So then I'll go for a three-month retreat to burn mine a cookie and people would just bring
me food, I won't see anyone and so on, thinking that that kind of stream solitude will sort
of result in freedom and might be, but you won't. You can only support the knowledge. If
you don't have the knowledge, that's it. You're just staying in the solitude and you will
not necessarily learn from it. Because if the solitude would always result in, then yes,
exactly the solitary confinement prisoners with OBI and Serrana Garnis. But I don't know.
There's been a wave from the found, a wave from unhowsome intentions, long enough.
Well, it's knowledge of what the firements are and unhowsome intentions. That's what
frees you. Being away from them is necessary to an extent to start discerning that knowledge.
But if you have no notion of what that knowledge is, no matter being away from those developments
will approve them. If anything, it would just conceal them further because now you don't
really don't know where to look for them. Because before, there were things kind of, they
would sort of prop the issues up for you and then you would see the issues are still there
and that's how you could judge your work. But in a completely solitary confinement, without
that prior knowledge, now you really don't know where to look or what to do.
So you're getting the strength being the necessary basis.
The strength being the necessary basis, yeah. And usage of solitude to use it to gain the
knowledge, not to use it to avoid the circumstances that bother you and you don't know how to deal with.
