Give this from me and good to Danikai to call this enchantment, because these five things
when developed and cultivated lead exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation,
to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to nibbana.
What five?
Here, Bikudwell is contemplating the unattractiveness of the body, perceiving the repulsiveness
of food, perceiving non-delight in the entire world, contemplating impermanence in all
conditions phenomena, and he has the perception of death well-established eternally, internally.
These five things when developed and cultivated lead exclusively to disenchantment, to dispassion,
to peace, to acknowledge, and admire, and this is a game from the enchantment, and what
an under is the perception of unattractiveness.
Here, Bikudwell reviews this body upward from the souls of the feet, and downward from the
tips of the hairs, enclosed in skin as full of many kinds of impurities.
They are in this body, hair of the head, hair of the body, nails, teeth, skin, flesh,
senus, bone, bone marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, stomach, excrement,
bile, fem, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, breath, saliva, snuck, fluid, the joints, and urine.
Thus, he dwells contemplating unattractiveness in the body, this is called perception of
unattractiveness.
He says, this is in regard to the supermeditation, meditation on the unattractiveness, and you
said, yesterday, you were talking about it, and you said that establishing one's mind
on a super, and then making it in urine without losing sight of the peripheral of that
super, even when sensual inclination is present internally or externally, but maybe
so.
Well, it comes down to the main point of that is basically you cannot be attracted and
repelt by the same thing at the same time.
So if that which attracts you, repels you, then you repelt the attraction will cease.
So that's important thing to realize, because when you read out the bit from Angutanika,
what is the Buddha recommends like reviewing your body in terms of what is made of, it's
very easy to do that wrongly, in a sense of you keep bringing the new things, new objects
of your perceptions into your mind, and then trying to kind of sort of generate a sense
of disgust and dispassion.
But the point is not to find things that are disgusting as a replacement to things that
are attractive.
The point is to see things that are attractive as underlined by a disgusting things, by things
that are repelling, by things that are non-attractive.
So you need to see the simultaneously present there just on a different level.
Because it's easily, you can easily force yourself to not look at the attractive and just
focus on non-attractive, but sooner or later when you're tired, when your mindfulness
lapses, when attractive arises again, you have no protection against it, because all
you're used to is doing the sort of replacing it and pushing it away and getting the non-attractive
because you were told that's what you need to do.
Well, actually, whenever said you need to replace it, you say you need to see it.
You need to see it in relation to that which is attractive.
So when you're reviewing your body, for example, to get that sense of dispassion because
it's all the organs by themselves are not quite repulsive actually and certainly non-attractive.
So that's easily seen, but what it's hard to see is that when you're attracted, either
towards gaining physical pleasure, towards pursuing the objects of physical pleasure externally,
you want to see that all of those experiences of centrality, basically, is fundamentally
inseparable from these disgusting organs and fundamentally established upon them so they
can never be apart from them.
They can never be independent of the repulsive foundations, which means that themselves
can never be really truly attractive.
So a person who is truly experienced dispassion and developed it, for them things are very
dispassionate and maybe slightly less dispassionate or rather very unattractive and slightly less unattractive.
Sensuality, the beautiful things become slightly less unattractive so you can still recognize
the beauty, but none of it is the attractive beauty they would induce centrality.
It's endlessly less ugly.
Exactly.
So it's ugly and less ugly.
Yeah.
It comes down to that.
It's ugly and beautiful that you're just trying to kind of revolve around, but in order
to see the beautiful as ugly, is you need to see that it's simultaneously and inseparably
bound up with those repulsive aspects that are kind of inseparable from inescapable from.
So that's why once the mind is experienced truly dispassion, that order of which comes
first ugly or beautiful cannot be changed anymore.
The beautiful cannot step outside of ugly ever again and assume its own privileged kind
of sensual existence.
That's how sensuality ceases as well, when it becomes fully enclosed in ugly and you
lose entire dispassion for any aspect of sensuality conceivable, possible.
Because in its nature you've seen it's just inconceivable without the basis of ugly and
such.
It's ugly in itself, unattractive or repulsive.
You see the danger in sensuality, you would have to then see the danger in you.
The danger becomes apparent once this passion has been developed, otherwise you can't grasp
the danger.
But once you experience this passion in the mind is truly sort of withdrawn from the perversion
of perception which is what sensuality is, perceiving an ugly is beautiful and it sees
it for what it is ugly and just slightly less ugly, but equally not wanted.
Then you recognize, wow, what a danger it is to actually keep focusing on the less ugly
and regarding is beautiful because it keeps you bound to the entire thing that is subject
to this complete annihilation eventually, sickness, aging and death and then repeat and again
and again.
It's because of that tiny little perversion.
Just because of your tiny little assumption in thinking that sensual, that beautiful
objects of senses can exist separate from the repulsive, non-attractive, disgusting
foundations that they are.
That's why it's important not to keep contemplating the repulsive kind of before or after or trying
to replace the beautiful sensual thoughts with it, you want to see them, so you need to
contemplate but you need to see it at the same time.
So yes, think about the repulsive things of the body so that you can experience this
passion, but then you have to apply or rather maintain that this passion, that's why
perception must learn how to endure, even when sensuality arises whereby you don't
just jump on sensuality and try to get rid of it, because that wasn't what you were doing
to begin with.
What you're doing is whether you choose to abandon attending the foundations of that
sensuality and give to rise to attending pleasing and like temporarily sort of particular
features of it, which is basically how sensual thoughts originate and get maintained.
So you don't want to keep replacing sensuality, you want to see through it.
So all of those things that the disgusting contemplations and so on that the Buddha
was encouraging, amongst the do, need to be seen through the sensual, through the beautiful
objects, through the beautiful things.
Not instead.
So you're not saying it once you're going, trying to seek out beautiful sights.
Oh no, on the contrary, no, no, no, no, yeah, exactly, well if you are seeking out a bit
of sight, there is no establishment of the right, that means the perception is already
perverted, which means the mind is not seeing, not attending to the roots of this passion,
roots of disgusting aspects of that sensuality, because you don't, you don't need to, you
need to restrain the senses first, fully, stop giving into the habit of seeking pleasure
by default, for these roots to be able to be seen through the a risen sensual prospect
in a form of thought or a possibility or intention.
But if your intention habitually leads you to immediately give in to the action by your
senses and seek out the pleasure, no amount of transparency in through it will be possible
because you just, you just went off, went off with it.
So yeah, that's something people think, oh, I must expose myself sensuality, but if
you need to prove to yourself that your free from sensuality means you don't know it,
means you doubt it, which means you're not free, if the doubt can enter it, there is
no freedom there.
And in the same sense, in order to be able to seek sensuality even as a proof, it requires
perversion of perception, it requires central perceptions to be established, which means
even if you're seeking out to prove it yourself means you're seeking out of sensuality.
So no seeking out, seeking out whatsoever and then seeing through whatever present, however
it's present, how it will be beautiful it might be, you see it inseparable from those
ugly aspects that you have been contemplating, because they are there.
Because the sensuality, the sensual beauty is actually ugly and disgusting and inseparable
from disgusting things, unattractive things, that's why freedom from sensuality is possible.
If it were truly beautiful and independent, you wouldn't be able to go out of it, but
then it wouldn't be a problem either, you wouldn't have to go out of it, but it's not
truly beautiful.
It's a mistake based on ignorance, based on sensual craving, based on the fire of lust
and so on, so that's why it's a problem.
That's why pleasure underlying by craving is a problem, pleasure without underlying craving
is not a problem, but there is no sensual pleasure that it's not underlined by desire for
more lust and greed and craving.
