I have to read this because it's a short one, and how it does have become observed
in moderation and eating.
Here, reflecting carefully, the big group consumes food neither for amusement nor for intoxication
nor for the sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the support and maintenance
of this body, for avoiding harm and for assisting the spiritual life, considering, thus I shall
terminate the old feeling and not arouse a new feeling, and I shall be healthy and
blameless and throughout the ease.
It is in this way that a bigger observed moderation and eating, and this, again, is the practice
of the unmistakened way, which is the basic ground, for the destruction of the text.
So, how does moderation and eating play part in this, play part in it?
Exactly, but I was just saying, if you are transparent in regard to your motivation and intentions,
so you make sure they are not rooted in sensuality, hence you would basically be contributing
towards your sensory strength in general.
However, food is necessary, it's not something you can just stop eating and say no to it.
In the same sense, you can do that to a sexual intercourse or to other things, unnecessary
things of central nature.
So you have to eat food, but then food is also inseparable from the sense of taste, and
obviously has a whole wide range of pleasures that revolve around food for people, which
means it's quite likely going to be central, unless you make sure that your motivation is
rooted in clear reflection and basically clarifying and developing new reasons as to why
you are eating in the first place.
So that's why you keep reminding yourself, again, not out of some sort of neurosis or
something.
If you don't remind yourself of the alternative reasons for eating, you will automatically
be rooted in sensual reasons, enjoying the taste.
But if you are rooted in proper reasons for eating, then no amount of refined central
taste can actually make it central, because you remain wakeful and clear and you don't
give in to any central intentions, for the duration of eating.
So you're not chasing your moses of food and observing your tongue and whatnot, you're
actually going the other way.
You're going the way of having your intention rooted for the purpose of filling up the belly
so I won't be hungry and will survive the next day.
So the moment your belly starts feeling full, because that's what you keep at the back
of your mind, you stop eating.
And then if there is any any any any response in terms of your thoughts wanting more and
stop them, that's obvious what it is, it's just craving, and you don't have to worry
about it because you haven't been engaging with it.
Dispaling of hunger.
Yeah, that's the purpose of eating.
But unless you keep that clear in your mind and often remind yourself, you will be
back onto the sensual reasons.
So that's what we like you maintain, the transparency of your intentions, because when
you have intention to eat, for as long as you're eating, that same intention is present
there.
So you just want to make sure it doesn't shift into like onto different roots.
It doesn't sort of get moves away from the reasons of like intended reason of eating for
just dispelling hunger and moves away onto enjoying this particular taste.
So that's how you also mind remains above the taste, not through denying or not tasting
it, but simply through not giving in to last version delusion on account of it.
And no amount of lovely, nice, agreeable tastes could overwhelm the mind of the mind.
Some days you need to eat more.
Exactly.
Some days you have to eat much more and your belly was still going full, feel like, well,
the hunger is gone.
So that's why there's no again, there's no method or technique or something of description
or recipe, eat this much every time though, you don't know.
But that's not the point.
The food was never the problem, it was your desire and lust in regard to it.
So you start approaching that by not having those intentions of eating rooted in that
sensuality, but other reasons for it.
Because you can't go either way, like you cannot, you cannot have like a sexual intercourse
for example rooted in all some reasons, that's just too obvious.
But things like eating food and drinking, yeah, they can go either way, they can be wholesome
or unwholesome.
Drinking water.
Oh, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no,
that's not negotiable, yeah.
I mean drinking water or whatever, I don't know, fruit juice or tea or coffee or things
like that.
Yeah.
And what about fasting?
Well, again, if done for right reasons, it can make this whole picture and relationship
between the last founded upon sensuality or, sorry, intentions founded upon last sensuality
or nonlast, non-sensuality, it can make that whole relationship clear.
But if you do, if you just fast mechanically, if you took it as some external determination,
no wisdom arise from it.
That's where self-mortification won't arise, won't reveal the middle way in terms of
you won't lead to liberation, nor indulge as well.
That's why the Buddha would say, let those who want to go and live on one meal and sit
under the root of a tree do it, let those who don't want to, wanting and don't want
to means knowing whether it's good for you or not, doesn't mean like, oh, great, so
I don't need to go out.
Well, maybe you should actually.
See, let those with divine view, those in different ways.
Pretty much, let those who know what makes their non-existent lust, what prevents non-existent
lust from manifesting, and what makes the existence lust disappearing.
Let those either go on the root of sure not, or eat one meal a day, or separate it, or
separate it out to you.
