So what is the point of celibacy, in terms of practice, what is the point of it?
Because many people are celibacy when they're not having sexual relations.
So why is it complete celibacy, potent or bad?
Well, you can say that even out of the practice of a Buddhist monk or just in general,
celibacy would be beneficial for a non Buddhist person.
And the most obvious reason why that would be is because you're not controlled.
You're not giving in to a very powerful desire that otherwise controls and shapes up your whole life.
Because, again, regardless whether people practicing dumb or not, sensuality and sexuality,
it defines quite a lot of people's lives.
It certainly has probably the strongest influence.
So if you were to adopt celibacy as a practice means you would be going against that,
that desire, that pull, which means you would be developing your mind in regard to that.
Because as you said, yes, sometimes people are celibate when they're not having sexual intercourse.
But that's not celibacy because when the opportunity comes they're going to have sexual intercourse.
But the point is to take it as a determination, as a practice.
And then obviously it's much harder. In the same sense, somebody is trying to give it smoking.
It's not harder to give a smoking if you decide to never smoke again.
As opposed to if you think, okay, I won't smoke for a month.
Then even the heaviest of the smokers can make it. It can last for a month.
But not if you decided it for the rest of your life.
So you can imagine how much more there is with celibacy.
But that's what I mean. If somebody does have the strength of the mind to come to the point of determining
an act of celibacy, means that the mind can start to develop on that level in that regard.
And yeah, if a person is celibate, they will eventually take time to kind of
drive the mind out from the sort of wetness of desires.
But once the mind is dried out, then literally everything else in the life in the world
is depending upon non-celebrity. The celibacy they're free of.
Okay, so that makes me so beautiful.
Well, everything you're identity basically.
You're identity would fail if a big person who doesn't practice done.
Say go beyond sensuality, sexuality, through practice of celibacy.
And they feel themselves from central cravings.
They would create a degree, be free of their own ego as well.
And they can see it and all the suffering that comes with it.
All the worry, all the anxiety.
Let alone if they were to sort of uproot that as well,
be the right of you and practice of the dumb.
Because the whole life, person's life, an average person that revolves around following desires
and getting what you want.
It usually revolves around sexuality, around finding a mate, a family.
The whole thing revolves around the very basic desires that are depliruted, obviously.
So if one is able to go against it, in a sense of not just pure denial,
but in a sense of actually developing wisdom and account of it,
like seeing the nature of desire, but not giving into that desire,
you can eventually overcome that desire.
And then you can imagine the freedom of that mind.
And then you can really compare it to being free.
Like being in prison, then being let out of the prison.
Crossing the desert, unknowing if you're going to make it to the other end.
And if you make it to the other end, it's like a huge relief, huge burden.
And again, I'm talking, even for somebody who is not practicing the dumb,
just sort of doesn't want to give in to their desires anymore.
And then overcomes that.
Quite a lot of release and relief.
Do you want to go and do that?
No, of course, because it's way too hard.
It's way too hard for most people.
That's why it's highly unlikely that anybody will do it today outside of some sort of real philosophy or religious practice.
Because there wouldn't be enough motivation because it's too hard.
Back in the day, they were back in the Buddhist time.
There were people who were just practicing for the sake of freedom of desire.
They were not necessarily followers of the dumb or anything else.
And that's why they did say people outside of this dispensation can't free themselves from these various forms of hope
but don't hold them in attachments and assumptions.
And the sensual desire was one of them.
But it's not just about giving up.
Celebrity in the Buddhist teachings, not just about giving up sex.
It's not just about giving up masturbation or not seeing women or not seeing men.
What I've read, it's more about the lighting in your own sexuality.
That is true celibacy, not the lighting in your own sexuality.
Well, it has to...
Okay, I see what you mean.
It has to start simply by giving up, simply by saying no.
But yeah, that is just the first step that you have to then go beyond.
If you really want to be free, otherwise you have to spend your whole life just saying no.
But that's not freedom.
That's just resisting it.
But yeah, there wouldn't be no freedom if you haven't resisted it first.
So by resisting it by saying no to these types of actions.
In order to overcome it, then yes, you have to overcome that sensuality in regard to yourself.
You have to overcome the attitude in regard to your own body.
The attitude that it's basically regarding the body as a basis for pleasure.
And then you see a direct kind of relationship with the pleasure of your senses.
And this pertains to any type of pleasure, not necessarily only sexual or something.
Any type of pleasure you gain through the senses, you can overcome by overcoming basically the attitude of regarding your body as a basis for that pleasure.
By appropriating the body, you appropriate that which body is attracted to.
By not appropriating the body anymore, you free yourself from the counterpart of your senses.
So then you're not just resisting anymore.
Then there is no need for resistance because there is no more pull.
But for as long as you're appropriating your senses, your body, you will be pulled.
Which means you might spend the whole life living a celibate life.
Which is good.
It's still better.
But it's not, it's not living to wisdom and it's not living to freedom from centrality.
