Well, all the problems can be solved if you see that all problems are caused by craving
people with sheer responsibility. There's no problem if there's no suffering. Or
rather, when there is a problem, means it's something is a problem because it's
making you suffer. Well, headache in itself, it's not a problem nor is it a
suffering. You're not wanting it to be that way and I wanted to have a headache
while having or not having a headache is not in your control. That's why you
suffer. So you crave to get rid of the circumstances that you find this
pleasing, which means you create a problem. That's what I mean. At the root of
every suffering is craving. It's impossible to experience suffering without
having the present craving present in your experience as your attitude. It's
impossible. That's what it would have said that the root of suffering is craving.
Not the external circumstances, however bad they might be.
Poverty is not suffering. Poverty is hardship, but hardship does not need to be
suffering. If you don't, basically, again, in a fundamental level, if you want to
describe the nature of craving, there's these three types. When circumstances are
pleasing, you're craving for more of that pleasure. The circumstances at this
pleasing, you are craving for that this pleasure to disappear, to not be there.
You want to get rid of it instantly. And the third type is the subtlest to see, but
basically, the circumstances are neither good nor bad. You kind of crave towards
indolence and searching excitement or whatever. People fear boredom. They fear
the neutral environment, which is neither good nor bad. They can't recognize it as
peaceful. So in that very manner, a person is fully responsible for all of the
suffering they've experienced in this life. Because there were even cases in
the suitors that the Buddha was giving the example of, was even if a highway
robbers attack you and sever you, limb my limb and torture you. That basically
won't be the suffering for you. It will be your craving in regard to it, your
hatred towards them, trying to get rid of it, thinking why they're doing this,
they shouldn't be doing this. Basically, trying to control the circumstances that
are disagreeable, without recognizing that actually, fundamentally, they're not in
your control. And you're responsible for lack of that knowledge, which then
generates more craving. So you just keep revolving around it.
So it's also instead of trying to solve every little issue that you have?
Exactly, yeah. That's when people don't see the, well, they don't see the
root of suffering. So they think the suffering is the, the circumstances around
them. So then they try to address every single instance, every example, every
issue, every person to talk to, everything disagreeable put away. I mean, that's
usually what people live revolver on.
That ends.
Yeah, it ends because it's misapplied. It's not applied with the problem is.
Which is, which is craving, yeah. So you're basically trying to solve your
suffering by at a completely wrong place where the suffering isn't.
