Okay, so we thought of doing a short, or not so short, series on the Nyanavira Telestichis,
specifically on his notes and Dhamma book.
And Venera Paine Ratan is behind the camera, so he's going to ask some questions that are
usually what people ask us about Nyanavira, starting from preface and then going through
different notes of that book.
So also, if the viewers have any questions about Nyanavira teachings regarding this particular
series, they can ask in the comment section and then we can probably include it in some
future videos.
So yeah, we're going to start with preface and then move onwards with other notes, especially
the ones that usually people have problems grasping them or understanding, or there's
some lack of clarity or something like that.
So I'll start us off with just reading a section from the first paragraph of the preface.
He writes, there is therefore nothing in these pages to interest the professional scholar
for whom the question of personal existence does not arise, for the scholar's whole concern
is to eliminate or ignore the individual point of view in an effort to establish an objective
truth.
It would be impersonal synthesis of public facts.
The scholar is essentially a horizontal few of things seeking connections in space and time
and his historical approach to the texts disqualify him, many possibility of understanding the
Dhamma that the Buddha himself has called Akalika, or timeless.
Only in a vertical view, straight down into the abyss of his personal existence is a man
capable of apprehending the perilous insecurity of his situation and only a man who does apprehend
this is prepared to listen to the Buddha's teaching.
So it can be a bit confusing about the idea of having two different kinds of thinking,
like what exactly it is that distinguishes a horizontal kind of thinking as he's saying
versus a vertical kind of thinking.
Could you elaborate more on that?
Well in brief, the main difference is the vertical thinking is the thinking done through
your existence.
So you do that thinking arises on the basis, literally on the basis of anxiety, existential
dread, recognition of your human situation.
That's where the Buddha would often refer in the suttas as a young man would get disillusioned
with life and then he would ponder on human situation and he would recognize this human
life he's subject to suffering, you would pray to suffering, I mean suffering is this
invisible hunter that can pounce on you at any time and you can't do anything about it.
So the main, that's the prerequisite, that attitude is a prerequisite towards the existential
understanding and then towards the right practice of Dhamma.
So that's what Janiro is talking about, when you're not trying to overcome any particular
issue that you might have in your life, but really understanding the nature of a human
deal and not being satisfied with it.
So that's why you cannot approach practice correctly as a scholar or as somebody who
just merely collecting information about the Dhamma, but you really need to make it not
optional for yourself in order to be able to do it rightly.
So that's what he meant because often people approach the suttas, approach the study mostly
for the scholarly value as in collecting the data, collecting information, drawing the
parallels in time and space and sort of rationalizing it, but not really approaching it on the
basis of that personal necessity of practice, in which case it's not optional anymore and
you really need to understand what the Buddha was teaching in order to be free from the
existential era.
So what is it about this vertical view that also made it the timeless view as opposed
to the horizontal one that's looking at connections and space time?
Well, as the Buddha said, the suffering has a presently arisen cause of craving, which
means that the freedom from suffering, freedom from possibility to suffer, which is suffering
in itself, is to be found in the present moment, but not in that kind of a contemporary mystified
notion of just being the present, but in understanding that pertains to the present
moment as in understanding the cause of that suffering that's here presently, simultaneously
arisen with that suffering.
So that is, that's what Nyanavir Atera described as a vertical view into your own being as
opposed to that horizontal view of you assuming or rationalizing before and after and in between
and left or right, not seeing present there isn't suffering simultaneously through that
you see present there isn't craving.
And you know that with the absence of that craving, suffering cannot stand even for a
second longer.
And that's why to be known individually, as in vertically, personally, by the wise,
dhamma that's timeless in that sense, it does not involve a passage of time, that direct
insight doesn't involve it.
People in the modern day like neuroscientists and psychologists and stuff, they also try
and study suffering, study, maybe apply their fields to the Buddha's teaching.
Are they using that vertical view or are they divorced from that in some way?
Well, they're divorced from that long time ago, when they sort of gave the unquestioned
validity to the scientific method, because science in itself negates the observer.
But certainly that's the starting premise.
Later on they might try to factor in the observer, but only through that scientifically assumed
external public world of matter, and then you try to re-include the observer, but you fail
to see that the observer was the one who was first.
He was the one who decided to look for these particular things and develop science out
of it, which means you can't use them that science to explain the tools of your perception
of your feeling, of your point of view, that as an observer you're inseparable from.
Yet that whole domain, that whole sphere, disappears in science, and when it's included,
it's included as a second best.
So then when a modern science talks about Buddhism, as if they're proving the Buddha's
teaching to be right, they've completely misunderstood it to begin with.
Because if the scientists were truly understanding that the Buddha was right, they would have
been at least, they would become at least the Sotopanna through their science, probably
Arrahants as well.
But they're not.
They're not free from sensuality, greed, aversion, delusion, wrong view, which means
when they say this is what the Buddha meant, they don't know what the Buddha meant, because
only when nobody's short in a Sotopanna knows what the Buddha meant correctly.
And that's one of the things that Venerina Luitero is always insistent upon, which is
a good thing to insist on, because you might be unpleasant to admit to yourself, especially
if you invested years of practice, but ultimately it can actually spur you further, because
you don't make a compromise thinking to know that which you don't, and you keep striving
until you reach that clarity of knowledge, which is necessary for any correct practice
of Dhamma.
Okay, I'll start reading now.
So going for the next part to page 12 of the Roman numeral 12 of the preface, it starts
existential philosophies then insist upon asking questions about self and the world,
taking care at the same time to insist that they're unanswerable.
Beyond this point of frustration, these philosophies cannot go.
The Buddha too insists that questions about the self and the world are unanswerable, either
by refusing to answer them, or by indicating that no statement about the self and the world
can be justified.
But, and here is the vital difference, the Buddha can and does go beyond this point, not
to be sure by answering the unanswerable, but by showing the way leading to the final
cessation of all questions about the self and the world.
So one issue that we can sometimes have when we're trying to start reading Nenevere is
it all sounds so very like kind of lofty and philosophical, you know, talking about existential
ambiguity.
For some, for some people it may be hard to see the connection between this vague existential
problem and just, you know, the suffering I have when things don't go my way, for example.
Could you, so could you talk about how suffering all does kind of come to be rooted fundamentally
in this, this problem?
The problem of existence.
Yeah.
Well, the reason why Nenevere approached it through the existential philosophy is because
he himself read quite a lot of it, because he wasn't existential philosophy, likes of
Slak-Sartre, Heidegger, well, even Kierkegaard is considered to be part of that.
It's not really a philosophy in a sense of a system of a thought that you develop and
again rationalize or idealize, but it's really in its root, obviously some of those philosophers
have went further afterwards, but initially the whole point of existential philosophy
was to found to be like a descriptive method of the phenomenological insight, and saying
phenomenological insight, nothing other than saying mindful discernment.
And that's why that philosophy was useful for a European thought, because most of the
other philosophies were pretending to forget the existence of the subject as a priority
as they would say existence precedes the essence.
And then the whole descriptive method developed around just seeing what's present there, not
developing conclusions based upon it.
So that's when Nenevere picked that up as a starting point for the protugena, because
that's the most you can get as a protugena to clarify the issue of your situation as
highly get described in the heart of every human situation is a concern, it's fundamentally
rooted upon concern, that's the most primordial aspect of human being, concern.
And that's nothing other than Dukkha in itself, you're not specifically concerned about this
or that, just a general, vague and biguous uneasiness, lack of ease, and that's what
Dukkha means, means an absence of ease.
So that's why that he would use existential philosophy to relate to the reader, because
that was his background obviously.
And also because it would require the person who has it to have some sort of, well at least
a degree of that self awareness of their own existence, which means they won't be coming
from some mystical point of view, some devotional inspiration and wanting to have the ecstasies
of meditation, like how they used to translate the Jhanas and so on.
So many people still have those, the residues of those notions as some sort of some transcendental
projection through the Buddhist practice in some new astral realm of arahanship and similar,
but it isn't, it's just freeing you from yourself, literally.
Hitting you from greed, aversion, delusion, framing you from unwholesome, that's what
Nibana is.
So in that sense, by opting to not sort of border down the instruction, he kind of sieved
out many people who would have just casually arrived at it and misunderstood it, it's
no doubt about it.
So that was his approach, but obviously, there was his approach, it can be different approaches,
but what cannot be different is the necessity of that existential concern.
As the Buddha said, a young man recognizes that he's prey to suffering, that's exactly
a description of the entire existential philosophy contained just in that one line in the suttas.
Imagine how would you feel if you go about every day of your life feeling your prey to
a hunter that you don't know where it is, who it is, and when it's going to pass.
You will feel very uneasy, and that is the definition of a human situation.
So that's why people use sensuality, distraction, even anger, all the worldly projects to destroy
themselves from the basic insecurity of the situation.
So that's how it relates to that practice.
So it sounds like it's what's more primordial than is not so much always when things do
not go one's way, but the fact that maybe they could, that these philosophers were pointing
at and Nyanavira was pointing at.
They could go wrong, not necessarily that it does go wrong, you don't need to wait
for it to go wrong, because sometimes by that time it might be too late.
You want to recognize that it could go wrong, that it might go wrong, and then of course
as the Buddha went step further and says well eventually it will go wrong, sickness, aging
and death.
But those are the ultimate examples of the human situation that can go wrong at any time.
So that's why that Dukka is not like intense, acute suffering, like you're being tortured,
tormented by something.
It's the recognition of the possibility of being affected by suffering, and you wouldn't
be able to do anything about it.
And that in itself it's a cause for concern, and concern in itself is an unpleasant feeling.
Thus Dukka is translated as the most general of suffering.
So you've mentioned that Nyanavira borrowed heavily from an existential, phenomenological
approach to his understanding of the Buddha's teaching.
Do you think it's important or necessary for a person who's trying to understand the Dhamma
themselves to become familiar, like start reading Sator and Heidegger and things like
that?
You haven't been reading it, no, no, even probably a result in wasting more time.
If they're already familiar, yeah it can be helpful.
But as I said, Nyanavira was referring to that, to those descriptions, to that terminology
of existential phenomenology, because, well because people who ordered them to suit it
could relate with greater clarity as it gives them a better starting point.
So it was just efficient way, but it's not, you know, it is, as I said, either you approach
it in that manner or in some other manner, one thing that a person must have is that existential
concern, recognition of its own existential human situation.
So if a person is aware of that and approaching Dhamma for that purpose, then they don't need
to go through the existential philosophy.
They just need to, well, become mindful of the feeling, the phenomenon of feeling, and
mindful of the possibility of things that they might feel while they're alive, as in
become mindful of the possibility of suffering.
One thing that a person reading through the notes can start asking is, you know, all these
descriptions of various terms we find in the suitors are great, they really make sense,
they're really clarifying, but how do I start practicing, meditating, and things like that?
The suit is so general, because it's been a long time ago, and the way of that oral
transmission means now they're very condensed in meaning and very general in instruction,
which means people can come from literally diametrically opposing angles and read the
same suits differently.
And you can't help that, because the Buddha is not alive anymore, as nobody there comes
from that time to point you in the right direction as to how to read, that's why it is necessary
to start with that existential attitude and self-awareness, because of that you won't
be able to go too wrong in your misreading of the suitors, which inevitably everybody
starts by misreading them.
And then you realize, yeah, you can interpret it like this, you can interpret it like this,
you can interpret it like this, but which one of those ways that you can interpret it really
pertains to that existential suffering, that becomes your criteria for practice.
So that's why it's important to develop, which is quite unpleasant, often results in
anxiety and sense of dread, because otherwise a person would be sort of overly committing
to a view, and then they would be reading the suitors from that point of view and then
defending it and so on, and not really applying it to that existential basis.
And is there a, I guess I was trying to ask, is there like a specific method or technique
by which one does apply it to that place?
Most certainly not.
Now, if it were, the Buddha would have spoke about it, and the closest to method or technique
is what the suitors tell us, develop very strange by the precepts, see the danger in
the slightest fault, be moderating eating, spend your days being mindful and wakeful.
As in, don't give in to distraction, don't give in to careless thoughts, that would in
itself result in calmness, tranquility, that can then result in seeing things clearly and
knowing exactly what you need to abandon, as in the unwholesome thoughts.
Those are routine, greedy version, delusion, they are routine, distraction, and desire
and craving.
But yeah, there is a tendency, obviously, that what I mean, a person, if a person does
not have that individual, personal, vertical criteria of existential angst and suffering
and possibility to suffer, it will be easy then to just give in to a promise method or
a mechanical technique, they can then result.
Well, you hope to result in liberation, but really, the only way you can liberate yourself
is to come to grips with your own existence, Baba, and see that you are responsible for
upholding it and then undo it.
That's why when the narrator was often talking about undoing things.
So the closest method that can result in understanding that you can come is to say you have to keep
trying to understand.
That's it.
I can't tell you do this to this to this to this and then that will automatically result
in understanding, because understanding is when you understood, based on the given data
and information.
So you inform yourself, through Naira, through the suttas and using the personal criteria
of being liable to suffering, because if you understood things correctly, that liability
to suffering should be diminishing and you will see directly.
That's why Sotapana, somebody who has reached that first stage, knows exactly what suffering
is, what origin of suffering is, what cessation is, and what to do to develop that cessation.
He's not guessing anymore.
He has a direct knowledge into that.
So to reiterate then, for one who's trying to develop this proper attitude and is trying
to undertake a study of the suttas and the notes on Dhamma, what is then the proper place
of these notes in that pursuit?
Well, the notes are sort of, well first of all, they need to live restrained by the precepts.
Depending on how far they want to go in their understanding, either fiber, but ideally eight
precepts, which means whether you are reading the notes or reading the suttas, if you don't
have the basic virtue being developed, maintained through your practice of mindfulness and samadhi
that comes out of it, no amount of understanding will take place.
It will all be in the abstract scholastic theory.
So the place of notes is for somebody who does live restrained and wants the work laid out
for them, as in what needs to be understood.
Some people can handle more of it, some people less, but the point is you do need to understand
at least a degree of the Buddhist teaching.
So the notes could help you develop that right attitude towards the suttas, how to read them.
Whether you would read them just as an Indian folklore, a social commentary of the times,
a loose compilation of the Buddhist utterances, or you're going to read them as the strictest,
condensed, and most universal, as in general, phenomenological description of your experience.
Because if you start reading them like that with that attitude, you realize, yeah, all
it takes is to understand fully one sutta and you can be another hunter to encounter it.
If you approach them as a folklore, then you can have it all, makes no difference.
But if you approach them actually as a direct description of something that universally present
in every human experience, it means then that you need to see it in order to understand
that sutta.
So that was one of the examples that really kind of, I didn't realize that, because when
I was a layman, I was reading the suttas and I found them useful, but I didn't quite
understand, well, their extent, their importance, until I came across in a era who, but by that
time I was reading lots of sattra, hide the gear, and other philosophy, being in time,
being in nothingness.
So I could read philosophy and I had no trouble following it, and I was quite familiar with
it.
So there was one bit when Janavira mentioned he gives this entire quote from sattra, or
hide the gear, maybe, the entire page, about a human situation and so on, about the senses
and sense perception.
And I remember I read that quote many times, so he felt like, oh, yeah, this is very useful.
And then he says, or for example, as the Buddha would say, so he compares what this like
pages of this philosophy said, compares, and he was just like one line from the suttas.
Then I read many times, but he never occurred to me to read it in such a heavily condensed
manner, to give it that kind of importance.
But then I realized, well, actually, I should be giving it that kind of importance, because
that's how people at the end of a discourse, discourse by the Buddha, would have become
utterance, or at least sotupanas, and then we read it today, we wonder why there's nothing
happening to me, because you're not reading it rightly.
If you approach every single line to be condensed with meaning, not in that scholastic sort
of investigation of the information and connections with other passages and so on, but genuinely
just what it actually is, what is describing it phenomenologically, what is being described
by it, phenomenologically, as in presently right here, right now.
And if you approach it like that, then you realize, yeah, one sutta, fully understood,
can certainly result in the right view.
As I just gave the example, like when the Buddha, I mean, many of us, would have just
read over that line when the Buddha says, a young man feels he's prey to suffering, subject
to suffering, so he goes forth into homeless life.
Oh, yeah, yeah, of course, yeah.
But if you stop and think about it, just that, just those two words, three words, prey to
suffering, contains the entire existential philosophy, volumes and volumes of work, centuries of
phenomenological development, it's all in that attitude.
That's all the existential philosophy concern about, experiencing concern in regard to the
basic nature of your existence, yet the Buddha just included in the first line of every other
sutta.
But then you realize, hold on.
So if I read the rest of this sutta, I have to have that attitude then, because he would
go further, that man who would feel he's prey to suffering, goes into homeless life, finds
a teaching, applies himself, and then becomes another.
But that's what I mean.
So you can, you can say, no, it was just a social commentary, and you can't debate that
because there is no proof in between or a living person who can say, no, you're right, you're
wrong.
But then you ask yourself, well, why do you practice?
Is it because some sort of cultural enrichment or gathering data or scholastic development
or is it for freedom from suffering?
Then you recognize that, well, scholastic understanding, social understanding, no matter how vast the
net of your connection develops, does not free you from suffering.
But phenomenological understanding, the present there isn't cause of the present there isn't
suffering does free you from.
And then you can decide yourself how you want to read the sutta.
One set of terms that comes up fairly often is a positive and negative.
There's footnote letter N, which describes a brief quote from Soren Kierkegaard regarding
the negative thinking, says, precisely because the negative is present in existence and present
everywhere for existence is a constant process of becoming, it is necessary to become aware
of its presence continuously as you only safeguard against it.
Janavir writes, positive or abstract thinking abstracts from existence and is thus incapable
of thinking continuously.
So it's not, it may not be clear to many people what exactly, what is a negative and a positive
kind of thinking, like those domains may not mean anything to some people.
In simple terms, a negative thinker is a thinker who is aware of his own situation while thinking.
He doesn't abstract the content of his thoughts from the situation, which is why it's called
abstraction.
So he remains aware of the background that the necessary basis for his whatever engagement
might be.
So that's why the negative thinker is in that it's negative in relation to the positive
content of his particular thought.
So he's kind of like aware of the background of his act of thinking or speaking or doing
things by body, aware of the peripheral.
That's exactly where in the sutta, that's exactly where the development of mind comes
down to, practice of samadhi, practice of jhanas, developing the sphere of that peripheral and
thus overcoming the particular domains of sensuality, ill will and so on.
So then when one is trying to understand these notes, is it that negative kind of thinking
through which they have to be understood as opposed to the positive thinking that one
may be used to?
Well, it's not something you can, negative thinking, not something you can jump into
by choice.
So it needs to be developed.
So by trying to understand what negative thinking is, what the negative thinker is,
that's how you begin to develop it.
So that's what I mean.
If you approach it just through like a positive comparison and scholastic study and so on,
you're not going to understand the notes.
But if you approach it because you want solution to the existential problem of liability to
suffering, then you will start to understand that because you will be reading them increasingly
more rightly, so to speak.
And that's what I mean, the virtue, the restraint, the sensory strength and the establishment
of virtue and the precepts needs, it's not negotiable, needs to come first and needs
to be maintained beforehand as well.
Which means then you took it on as your lifestyle.
The whole approach to them are not just something you might do on the weekend or occasionally
on an online floor.
At the end of the preface he talks about this fundamental structure, which is at the back
of the notes on Dhamma.
A lot of people have many questions and are very interested in mathematical appearance.
Do you think that's something that's important for understanding the Buddhist teaching?
No, absolutely not.
As the animator Thérrez himself said, it's just an instrument of thought that he himself
found very useful, but you can't really think fundamental structure in phenomenological terms.
Because you are the structure, your experience, the pancha, pancha, pancha, but I can't,
the five aggregates, is your experience.
So what he deals there with, he deals with the description of the structure, which would
require you to have an external view to it, which you can't.
So in order to describe it, you must give up the phenomenological method.
If you give a phenomenological method, you're not talking about existence anymore.
That's what he felt it as an instrument, as a justification for reflexive thinking and
so on, as an explanation for it.
But in terms of somebody needing to understand it, or something, it's not necessarily completely.
Because also, you cannot factor in that structure, which is the problem of science as well.
They meet the same problem, which is when you assume the external point of view to your
experience, you can't factor in the feeling, the domain of feeling.
I mean, you can represent it on the paper, but that's not being felt right there and
then.
So in that sense, feeling is always present, but you remember the past feeling, the future
feeling, the present feeling, you feel it presently.
Hence the Buddha said, my teachings for the one who feels, who knows how to feel.
So that's why I wouldn't, unless you already have a starting point that allows you to relate
to fundamental structure and kind of just enrich the instrument of your thinking, that's fine.
But otherwise, you'd be just wasting time.
I think he included it because it is quite unique.
And for somebody who was in philosophy and phenomenology, yeah, it's a very interesting
and useful thing in that semi-scholastic semi-phenomenological sense.
