How can I get rid of attachments to things that are to be free from being attached to things?
Well the first step is to stop, stop using them for again in pleasure.
So you have to refrain from obtaining pleasure through the things you are attached to.
Because attachment is inseparable from the notion of being pleasant, whatever it is.
If it's your house, if it's your spouse, your children, your friends, attachment to them
means to that degree, there is a degree of pleasure in them, in their company, in their
presence, in what they can do for you, what they can provide you with and so on.
So you have to basically stop maintaining that attachment through constantly exhibiting
the behavior of that, of gaining pleasure through them.
And then start seeing the opposite, that it's actually not pleasant but dangerous to be
attached, yeah. Because if you start, all you have to do, like say in telling you
you attach your house, all you have to do is start pondering, thinking on the quite
a real possibility of losing it, like through a natural catastrophes or anything, basically
to things can happen, that are beyond your control, they can happen at any time to you.
And then you realize that your whole world of dependence upon those things, that's what
attachment is, it's going to be swept away with it, and it's very dangerous.
So when you recognize that perilous situation you are right there, in it you will, well,
you will want to be not attached to those things, and that's a first step really.
How much do you throw those things away?
No, see destroying those things does not free you from attachment or the things, because
the attachment is not the things, it's your attitude in regard to them.
Now it is the most natural response then, like when I'm attached to this, I'll throw
it away, I'll break it apart, I'll say note it, but that doesn't affect your mind,
your attitude of attachment, which means another thing will slot in, instead of it sooner
later, you're going to give in.
So in order to free yourself from attachment, you need to basically discern the reasons
for your attachment, and things are not the reasons, they are the objects of your attachment.
The reasons is, well, fear for your life, fear for your safety, fear for your health, fear
of boredom, fear of not having anything to do, fear of loneliness, all those things that
people are afraid of, and that's where they're attached to other people and to other things.
So that's what you want to overcome, those fears, and not act out of those fears, and the
very first step of overcoming any fear is being aware of it, admitting it, discerning it,
you can't tell from someone's output appearance that they have free from attachment.
No, no, no, no, no, a person can be theoretically, can be living in a very nice house, a very comfortable
life, have lots of luxuries, but internally genuinely not be attached to it, but it's highly
unlikely today that that will be the case because it takes a lot of effort, and if a person
is able to make that effort and gain their wisdom, they wouldn't be investing all their
time in maintaining all those things and luxuries, they're probably giving it up naturally,
not as a response of, oh, I'm bound by this, I'm sort of trapped by my attachment, so I'll
just destroy the objects of it and pretend I'm not attached.
No, they would be overcoming it through proper understanding, they would be removing the
actual attachment, not affecting things, so then if something were to happen to those things,
they wouldn't suffer an account of it, but it doesn't mean they seek out the destruction
of those things beforehand in order to prove themselves that they're not, if you need
to prove to yourself that you're attached, means you don't know, sorry, if you need to
prove to yourself that you're not attached, means you don't know that you're not attached,
means you're doubting, it means you are attached, if you're not free from doubt, you can't
say you're free, so outwardly, it's not a measure of attachment, a person can have a big
family, many children, but not actually be attached to them if he has wisdom, so he'll
be helping them, being there for them, but if something happens, he won't be destroyed
and completely, completely unable to continue his life.
