Again, this is the Angutra, Bikku is possessing three qualities Bikku is practicing the
unmistakable and has laid the groundwork for the destruction of the tanks.
While three, here are Bikku guards the doors of the sense faculties, observes moderation
in eating and is intent on wakefulness. And then it's number one. And how Bikku does
a Bikku guard the doors of the sense faculties. Here having seen a form with the eye, Bikku
does not grasp its marks and features, since if he left the eye faculty unrestrained, bad
unwholesome states of longing and dejection might invade him. He practices restraint over
it. He guards the eye faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the eye faculty. Having heard
a sound of the ear, having smelted odour with the nose, having tasted a taste. With the
tongue, having felt attacked our object with the body, having cognized the mental phenomenon
with the mind. Bikku does not grasp its marks and features, since if he left the mind
faculty unrestrained, bad unwholesome states of longing and dejection might invade him.
Bikku practices restraint over it. He guards the mind faculty, he undertakes the restraint
of the mind faculty. It is in this way that the Bikku guards the doors of the sense faculties.
It's in terms of sensual restraint. And that seems to be the groundwork to begin practicing
a supermeditation, or wanting to be free from sensual irritation. So that you don't,
you don't necessarily have, you don't at all have to go and seek out beautiful objects.
And then practice this supermeditation. All you need to do is practice sensual restraint.
Because the whole mind is already geared towards the mistake of sensuality. So even if you're
not actively seeking things with your senses, the mind and the thoughts and the way of
learning, it's already implying sensuality. So that's why you don't need to go and
prove to yourself that you just need to keep restraining until the knowledge in regard
to the nature of sensuality has fundamentally unattractive develops. And then of course
you won't have to prove anything because you've done it. That's how you go beyond senses
when you lose any form of concern with them, towards them, including concern of proving
that you're free from concern in regard to them. So if a thought comes up and image something
that you attract to you, which will inevitably happen exactly. So in order for those thoughts
of sensuality to become apparent, the actual senses must be well restrained beforehand.
That's why the winner, the sealer, comes first and that whole thing. So what you're saying
is to actually see the signs and features of it. Exactly, because sensuality is rooted
in those thoughts, but you're not seeing those thoughts because you're immediately out
with the senses seeking the pleasure. So that's the whole point of restraint. Like really
I'm wavering the strain, like you don't give in because if you do your undermining your
own clarity in regard to your own sensual thoughts, which means every time you give in,
you sort of induce more obscurity that you have to undo later. So that's why like seeing
the danger in the slightest fault. Because you know how hard it is to purify it and then
how hard it is to maintain it pure, yet that purity is necessary for any sort of insight
that you can develop in regard to the root of sensuality, which is the level of thoughts.
So if you want your thoughts, sensual thoughts to become apparent, to be seen through, as
founded upon the unattractive, the senses, the actual senses must be fully, fully restrained
beforehand. Then the mind becomes clearer. The mind affects the sensuality, the sensual
intent and so on. Or you will, the same. It becomes clearer when the body and the senses
have been restrained beforehand. So there is absolutely never a reason to give in to
non-restraint. If it's non-restraint means it's not done. Obviously, just restraining
senses in itself will not result in you understanding sensuality either. You need to know what to
look for, how to look for, what I described in the previous talk. You have to see the
unattractive basically in the heart of everything that's attractive, always. Like attractive
cannot step and become independent from unattractive. But if you don't see that, then yet, sense
restraint is good. And your mind will probably develop in various ways, but not to the point
of the right view and freedom from sensuality and so on. For that, you need a bit more.
But none of that will be available to be developed more if you don't have the sensual strength
beforehand.
So again, if this sensual thought arises and you pick up the signs and features of
sensual thought, you want to see that that sensual thought.
No matter what signs or features will be picked up, you also want to maintain the perception
of inherent foundations of disgust. So no matter where your mind goes, left or right
with those signs and features and prospects and possibilities, the unwavering perception
of it's still very much always within the container of unattractive disgust. You stop
assuming the external to it. You stop making it independent from any disgust, which is
when the mind gets pulled by a central craving. So that's what I mean. Like you have to see
it simultaneously present, not like going like a method or succession of steps or something
like that.
First, you restrain the senses. That's as much as a method as you're going to get. Like
don't negative method in a sense of you don't engage with a sensuality through your senses.
And then yes, when the mind inevitably thinks sensual thoughts, images, memories, the
signs and features of something, something beautiful that accidentally came across the
sound, the smell, the sight and so on, if the sensor is strained, then that you have
a groundwork now, which is the level of those thoughts that are picking up sensual signs.
So you want to basically learn how to simultaneously see the inseparable basis of disgust in regard
to any possibility of those sensual thoughts. Not this thought, that thought, or this particular
thought, any, just entirely in its nature and its domain. It's fully inseparable from
the unattractive. It's rooted in it, inconceivable from. And that's how you get to know it to
discern it.
And then you don't have to keep doing anything because whenever sensuality arises, it arises
with disgusting heart. And you can't want it at all, not even in your imagination anymore.
And that's how you would also understand that all the sensuality that has been in the past
that you did engage in, all the sensuality that you would even get, it's still the same
same nature, same everything cannot step outside of this basis, vessel of disgusted, fully
contained. In the same sense, slightly different than in the same sense, how Atawada ceases
when you see that external to the five aggregates is inconceivable. No matter what self-view
or what I have, what conceit, it's fully contained within the original experience as a whole,
which is the experience of the five aggregates. When you fully discern that, you will eventually
stop assuming any external dimension to it, which is basically the definition of Atawada,
a self that's external, that's independent of the five aggregates. And it's the same
principle in regards to assuming the external, beautiful, independent of the foundation
of the ugly, of not wanted, of this passion, which is why both are on the level of Upadana,
Atawada, and sensual, sensual desire.
