How to calm the mind of the freshness of thoughts, the right thoughts, or the right thoughts
or the right mind?
Well, the overactive thoughts are basically already a symptom of you being overly committed
or overly engaged or overly invested emotionally in things.
So you can't necessarily directly just go ahead and stop your thoughts, because that will be
also a form of thinking, which means you'll be contradicting internally.
But what you can do is basically see how they came to be.
How did you end up in a place of your mind spinning out of control?
And I think always you will find out that it's because you were not restrained beforehand.
You were not restraining things you said, things you done, things you wanted to do.
And now obviously the mind is still sort of running on that momentum.
So the most you can do in those cases is just not add more to it.
Don't do any things by body speech or further by mind on account of a restless spinning out of control mind.
But endure it because it will tie it out and calm down.
But you try to learn from it in a sense of this is an indication of a problem.
It's not a problem in itself.
The problem in itself is basically the fact that you were acting under strain.
As in, you know, you got into an argument, you said things out of heat.
Or some like, I don't know, over engaged in centrality.
And then you're already committed and you couldn't stop when you wanted to.
Now you're paying the consequences and things didn't end up the way you wanted to and so on.
And then yes, then the mind is just going to be revolving like crazy.
But because of your behavior, you wouldn't have had the ground
normal momentum for such a for such a wild spinning if you didn't provide it for it.
But if you just try to, I must stop thinking and give me meditation.
And he's, I'll stop thinking yet, not change my behavior.
It's just, it won't work.
Because most of these things, when they pretend to mind more of like symptoms of the underlying issue,
of greed, aversion, delusion, ill will, last and so on,
they were not the problem in themselves.
Because people usually think our meditation or something will help me like control my mind.
But underneath that, I'll still do whatever I want to do, whenever I want to do it, however I want to do it.
And it doesn't work like that.
You want to quit things.
Yeah, well, basically you want, you want to believe that removal of the symptoms
removes the underlying illness.
It doesn't work.
What about, like, undecisive indecisiveness?
Shoulder chooses, shoulder chooses.
Well, that's, that's fine.
That's fine.
In a way of, well, fine to a degree, but obviously it can become an issue when you just can't commit to a choice.
When you, when you expect choice to be made for you, so you don't feel responsible.
And even that, again, that is again a symptom of you not accepting responsibility in the first place.
Because whatever you choose, even if, even if it feels like that the choice was placed upon you by circumstances,
you choose to accept it, because you can say no to anything.
So if you start thinking along those lines in terms of that you kind of only responsibility no matter what you do,
then it becomes different.
Then you will obviously think twice, even in regard to small decisions.
But then at the same time, you won't feel like it's the end of the world in regard to big decisions.
Because responsibility has been brought back on you, so you can't.
You're not ignoring it anymore.
And that's why people get into that, and the size of state.
It's because really what they're indecisive about is whether they should take responsibility or not.
But that's what I mean.
If you start reflecting upon it, you'll see that that's not an optional matter.
You are already responsible.
So the first line, you will make a good decision.
Well, a better decision, yeah.
You might not end up the way you will hope to, but you won't be affected by that as much as you would if you try to pretend that you are not responsible in the first place.
That's what people think.
Like if they're refrained from choice, they think they're not choosing.
But refrained from choice is your choice in regard to some other particular choices, which means it's equally a choice.
But if I don't commit to this or that, I avoid being sort of burdened by those things.
But actually, you were just burdened by non-committal, which can be even worse burdened because it's much harder to see.
And it doesn't be stuck in it for a very long time.
Oh, yeah, forever.
Forever, I mean, rather than speaking, but yeah.
It sort of, it establishes itself on the level of a view.
So unless you dig it up yourself and sort of develop transparency through it and see what it is,
then you will maintain that view for the rest of your life.
And thank you for awarding your responsibility.
Just in reality, all you're doing really is making less...
Well, making choices from a more inferior perspective.
Because once you accept responsibility, your perspective is much bigger.
It's more unpleasant initially, but overall, actually, you have a greater perspective on those.
And wait and what they entail.
You know the responsibility, you're more like reactionary sort of reacting to this or that.
And then just hope things will end up well.
But they don't.
I mean, what you regard well, maybe.
But overall, they don't.
Because the worst thing you can do is ignore responsibility for your own existence.
So it's better off to accept responsibility.
And then even if all of your choices end up in failure or whatever,
and you haven't achieved anything you hope for, you still took responsibility for it.
And that's a greater achievement, actually, than any of those particular achievements of your choice.
