So, what is the purpose, the rules, the precepts, why do you practice renunciation?
The purpose of it is developing the strength of your mind and the absolute first step
for that is to be able to say no to yourself, to say no to your desires, wins, habits.
So every, all of the main rules upon which a practice is based is they're very practical.
So to speak functional, necessary in that sense.
They're not held because of a belief or because of the authority, they're held because
they're held in themselves, the practice of meditation and development of the mind.
So basically think of the rules as a fertile ground where you can plant seeds of a plant
or some trees.
So it's not a tree, it's not a seed, but having a grown tree would be impossible if you
don't have a fertile ground to do so.
So in that sense, you see the necessity of the fertile ground, you see the necessity
of the rules.
Without them, there's no point if you cultivating seeds and watering the plant when you have
destroyed the fertility of the ground, when you have compromised the fundamental rules.
What are you trying to do?
Sorry?
What are you trying to do?
Well you're trying to grow the freedom, freedom of your mind, because the mind is bound
by the desire, by the craving, by the feelings.
Mind is liable to feelings, which means when suffering arises, you won't be able to prevent
it.
When pleasure arises, you won't be able but to indulge it.
Means you're controlled by what you feel.
And you're controlled because the mind is too weak in regard to what it feels.
So you want to become stronger than all those things, and the first step to developing of
that strength is mere restraint, being able to say no, not to everything, forever, but
to certain things that are inseparable from desire, craving, ill will hate anything
unhoused and basically.
Yeah, eating at a certain time, it's again, it's just like you eat because it is necessary
for the body to remain alive.
But you don't want to be using it as a sensuality, as a form of escape, and then you just keep
eating throughout the day, eating only what you like and so on.
So you recognize a degree of necessity to eat, and that's what you focus on.
And yeah, if you eat enough calories once in a day, that's absolutely fine.
There is absolutely no reason to eat more.
Eating more than what you need is going to be bound to come out of sensuality, out of craving,
out of desire.
But it's not a life-threatening hunger.
So basically in the evening, you have desire to eat, and instead of habitually just giving
into desire and satisfying it by any means, you force yourself to reflect on it, because
you know you want to eat, you want to break the rule, so as a form of restraint, what's
the alternative?
Well, it's to think, okay, why, how, why am I pulled by this desire, why this hunger
controlling my mind?
And that's how you, that's how you go beyond the desire, eventually.
If I ate a meal at night, I started eating, then I'll be free from desire.
No you won't, you, you'll be free from hunger, but the hunger was not your desire.
Yeah, there would have been no desire without a hunger, but the hunger is not a desire.
Desire is always mental.
So when the hunger, when the physical state affects, controls your mind, then it becomes
a desire, which means you might go and remove the physical state, but the liability of your
mind to be controlled by the physical state remains, which means next physical thing comes
and you're going to equally be bound by the same desire.
Hence you don't set, you can't satisfy a desire, and everybody knows that.
You can be chasing and engaging in all sorts of sensuality, you can never satisfy a desire,
why?
Because it's not where you're trying to satisfy.
You're satisfied with physical circumstances, but those are not what the desire is.
Yeah, desire is inseparable from those, but it's not those.
It's not those things.
So your precepts, thanks.
So the precepts are basically just like laying out the ground where you can practice.
Just putting up a fence, fertilizing the ground, and agreeing upon those things.
As a starting point, you have to start somewhere.
So all the precepts were basically, that's what I mean, they were quite functional in
that sense.
Ah, you eat.
In the beginning the monks were allowed to eat in the evening.
It was not specified you don't in the morning, they could eat many times a day.
But then it was sort of becoming impractical for various reasons, going out at night to
collect the food, getting up all sorts of accidents and so on.
So then a rule was brought in, you eat it at the right time, so you don't go out to collect
food at night to go during the day, then they could still eat at night, but then you stop
eating at night as well.
You just eat when you go and get the food, it just becomes more practical, easier, and
you don't spend the rest of your day being concerned and planning about the food, you
spend it practicing restraint.
And practicing wisdom and practicing meditation.
Well, those, yeah, the eighth precepts, those are the basis of practice, those are the,
that's what defines their fertile ground, they're not negotiable.
Like how can you possibly be practicing the clarity of the mind, developing the strength
of your mind, when you're drinking alcohol, that's clearly directly affecting the clarity
of the mind.
And it has no practical value, like you need to eat some food, you need to meet a certain
degree of certain amount of calories, you don't need to drink alcohol, hence it's always
going to be central reasons.
And even people say, I drink only because people around me pressure me to do so, that's
also central reason, you're basically afraid of affecting adversely the central environment
around you, you don't want to upset anyone.
You don't want to have to be kind of ostracized or whatever by your friends or not, so you
drink, it's ridiculous.
You're trying to develop the strength of your mind, yet you're giving to the basic weaknesses
of like, oh, they're laughing at their teasing me, so what?
How can you be beyond suffering, beyond the favorite emotion when someone's mere teasing
is affecting you, and you can't, you can't maintain your behavior, do you hear me?
No, of course, it's a further ground.
You can have all the further ground you want if you don't have the actual well cultivated
seeds, and if you don't put the work in maintaining that soil, then they're not going to grow.
Because you have to water it, you have to provide enough sun, you have to work around it
once you plant the seeds, but just leaving, just hoping for the soil to do its only one,
to do the work you want, it's just the soil.
So you can have 300 rules, 1000 rules, 5 rules, as many rules as you want.
Right.
It doesn't, it doesn't matter because there's other work that needs to be done.
Yeah, you need to have the rules that cover the necessary basis, and those are basically
what is known as 8 presets, or 10 presets if you want to take it maybe a step further,
but that's it.
Everything else is derived from that basis, it cannot add more to it.
So in that sense, yeah, having 3000 rules, it's not necessary.
If you've covered the basis of these 8 presets, if you don't do anything unwholesome on
the account of the 8 presets, that's it.
You have sufficient basis for complete freedom, from suffering, from feelings, and anything
else.
What, what, what can you give up here?
What's a basic, what's a basic set, preset, what's anybody can follow?
Don't, right.
Don't kill, don't steal, don't cheat, or preferably.
Or ideally, be a completely celibate, leave a completely celibate lifestyle.
Don't, well don't, sorry, yeah, don't drink and take drugs, in a sense of don't consume
things that directly affect mindfulness and awareness and composure.
So you have to, those are like the five basic ones, and they have to be basically taken
seriously.
And I'm talking about someone who still lives in the world, but for a month, then you
have the 8 presets, you have the non-butification, non-indulgence in sleep, and not eating it
the wrong times, as you not just spend the whole day eating around and thinking about food.
So you want to start kind of harnessing your mind basically, harnessing the outposts,
the behaviors of your mind that are founded upon desire and non-restraint.
So basically, you're setting up a fence, tying it down, pinning it down until it comes
down.
That's what the presets are.
But in itself, it's not enough.
The necessary basis, the container, but then the work needs to be done within that.
Once you fence the yard off for a wild horse, you need to start training it.
Yeah, you can't start training it, inconceivable, when you can always run off into the mountains.
But now you fence it off completely, you repair any patches that he was escaping through,
you brought it back, now he can't escape.
You wait for it to calm down, because he will calm down, sooner or later he's going
to get tired of running around in circles.
When it's calm, then you start training it.
But then if you remove the fence and you haven't trained it, it's going to run off again.
So you have to keep the fence until it's fully trained, and when it's fully trained,
then it doesn't matter if the fence stays.
And that's basically the definition of the presets.
So even as a layperson, the five presets are a certain degree of that fence, which is
a good thing, because you are taming down the wild horse, which what mind is really for
most people.
So you're taking a bit more control over your own behavior, over your own desires, over
your own sort of impulses that you usually, you can't say no to.
Yeah, that's the first step.
