So it's sort of a few things down above my points, what I'm reading.
So composure as a result of mine for reading, that's what I'm looking for, that's what I'm
trying to do.
Okay, while you're ready, you'll need to say straight, what composure is a result, can be
a result, or rather the right composure is the result of this passion.
This enchantment, neither the disgust towards the world, towards the senses, central pleasures,
that's the composure you want.
You don't want some sort of contemporary concentration, technique or something like that.
You want composure based on this passion, based on turning away from the desires towards
the world.
Mine for me is the death provides you with that.
But as it was the case in the suitors, it's a bit bloody keep us some people over the edge.
So then the alternative, I eat the same thing.
Just in a form of mindfulness of reading, just in a form of a less personal approach.
Yes, of course.
Well, yeah, in mindfulness of death, you begin, I am basically subject to death and this
is disgusting, the body and the mind, thinking through your point of view.
Mindfulness of breathing, you take the breathing as a point of view, not yourself.
And then you are, I'm breathing like this, I'm breathing like that.
But basically, the fact that the Buddha offered it instead of Maramanosate means it's
that thing.
It's pertains to that thing.
So if you do mindfulness of reading rightly, you are basically contemplating death rightly,
and you are experiencing this fashion towards the world rightly.
You say to our checker, suitors, you are teaching a super meditation.
Oh, yeah, it was a super, wasn't it?
Yeah, it was a super, wasn't it?
Yeah, it was a super, I think.
Yeah, I think so.
Yeah.
Death.
Yeah, that's what I was trying to say.
Basically, the super and death kind of just discussed.
But as I said, it comes to me and this body and I am.
So if done rightly, if the Buddha said this, you are through to no time, full dispersion
right away.
But some people might get a bit too much and then don't think about it, better off without
his body.
And then they were jumping off the cliffs and asking those other, that crazy man to kill
them with a sword and some of them.
Yeah, I was going to say that's what the end goal of the mind from the breathing, that
attached to the quantumist's mind for dissonance.
All of that is basically rooted or sprints from correct dispassion, like you feel no desire
to lose a world, to lose life.
And also, you don't feel any desire to a death either.
Why is it?
Well, because death is the sort of, well, the notion of death requires the basis, the notion
of life that you have.
So that's when people, when people are involved with the life, that's when they want death.
When their life sort of doesn't go their way, or goes, or it's actually unpleasant, then
they want death.
With the same desire, they are wanting life, now they want the ending of life.
But when you feel dispassion towards their life, you feel dispassion towards, you don't
care whether their life is there or not, thus you don't care whether you are alive or
not.
But possibly, be desiring death either.
That's why would you be dispassion towards life?
Sorry?
Why would you be anxious in terms of, you know, because that's, what?
What way do you see that you watch the breath and you become dispassionate towards life,
you know?
You see the topologies.
So you mean, how will breath make you dispassionate towards life?
Nothing.
Yeah.
Well, by understanding that your life can end in any next scene breath or not breath, without
your control.
So you actually have to take that idea of, you have to think about the breath, you can't
just be watching it.
Oh, yeah, of course.
Yes, we think it will be going on here.
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, I said millions of times before, I'm not talking about modern repassionate techniques
of Burmese or what, not, or even what people see in life unless you're breathing it.
I think.
Not at all.
That's all nonsense.
You really assert this.
And because it was quite clear how you do the breathing.
You're breathing like this, you're breathing like this.
So basically, you're actively involving your volition in the way how you breathe, while
you're being mindful of that breath.
Why?
Because if you do that steadily enough, it will reveal that no amount of volition can cross
that threshold after which the breath becomes in your control or rather the life that is
provided by the breath becomes in your control.
That's impossible.
You can only control the manner of your breathing, but the way that your life depends upon
your breath, that's completely inconceivable for you.
To control, to access, to have any input on you, you could just be breathing.
You know, you've got the, you've got control of the, it's control of the intention to
breathe in a particular way.
Yeah, but you don't have control over the way your body.
Or it's like the normal amount of control that you're right now exerting here, breathing
slowly, breathing relaxingly, breathing like this, breathing like that, breathing pleasantly
normally, normal to that control can sort of obscure or prevent the clarity of the life
can end, the very next, in breath or our breath.
It just cannot cross into that upon which your life depends.
So that's how you also abroot the notion of self, the notion of me and mine in regard
to your own volition, which is the hardest thing to do, because that's the closest to you.
That's intention, that direction, the point of view, but when you see normal and you do
that long enough, like mindfully, willingly, intentionally, yeah, you live in nothing
out.
Whatever is there, you're seeing as dependent upon that, which is not in your control,
which is, which is basically that breath, the, the, the life aspect in that breath, that's
not in your control, the manner of your breathing you can control, but the fact that your life
depends upon that breath you cannot control, that bodily breath, yeah, that very bodily
breath, yeah, the organs and air moving and everything else, because it is, see, if you're
seeing, if you're watching my intention to breathe, can I actually watch my intention
to breathe, you see?
Well, you watch that by breathing, by being my full of your breath, of course, with
intention to breathe, yeah, in a particular way, as I can say, the breath in calming the
body, the results of that, what I see coming at the same time, this is my, is the body breathing
out.
Yeah, intention is present, there's some tennis to be the body breathing in such manner.
Yeah, but I was the intention to look like an intention, yeah, because I get confused
with, am I now paying attention to the actual body breathing, it doesn't matter, why am
I paying attention?
That's where you're paying attention, as long as you're including both things.
Your intention can be paying more attention to the bodily aspect or the eye and breathing
aspect, doesn't matter.
What is that?
It doesn't matter, as long as both things are included, and nothing is left out in regard
to seeing that fundamental dependence upon that, which is not in your control.
This is an oxygen present in the breath, whatever you want to call it, whatever you want
to label it, whatever you want to designate it, doesn't matter, the point is, if your intention
of breathing can defeat your life depends upon it, you can control only so far, ultimately
you can't.
Because these exercises are like breathing, calm, calming the body, breathing, calm the
bodily from it, relaxing, experiencing the whole body breathing, experiencing the whole
body breathing.
So now I'm paying attention to the whole body.
Well, basically you're just keeping it, keeping it active, keeping it, keeping it, keeping
it active to remain mindful of your very evolution, because the moment you slip into a method
or technique you're done, mindfulness cannot be there.
It also doesn't mean that every next breath you have to do differently, all those are just
listed the ways you can be doing it while remaining mindful, and then within that mindfulness
of the general kind of of the fact, of the general fact that you're being undermined
basically by the nature of your life's dependence upon breath, you cannot access that.
You can be breathing as softly, smoothly and as controlling as you can be, but the dependence,
the phenomenon that your life depends upon it on the presence of that breath, that's
something you cannot control, that's just there, and if that changes, no matter if you're
breathing will keep your life.
Think of it like, you keep breathing normally, but suddenly there is no oxygen where you're
breathing, you're breathing some, I don't know, carbon dioxide.
You're still breathing, but you're not actually going to be alive for much longer despite
your same evolution, same effort, same everything, but this external circumstance, this external
form that your life depends upon has changed, and you cannot have an input in there.
You cannot breathe in such a manner to maintain your life, so to speak, despite the absence
of oxygen in there you're breathing.
In other words, the aspects of which your life depends are actually a control, but not
knowing that clearly enough, the notion of control that you have, or rather the notion
of evolution that we have, that we can exercise, induce the notion of ultimate control, so
you think you're breathing because you're alive, because your life is in your control,
and then if you suddenly end up somewhere there is no oxygen to breathe in, if all that
is unfortunate, incident or something, but the fact is that such things are possible means
that your life is rooted outside of your control, because if you are truly in your control,
no incident or accidents could happen to you of any kind.
I mean breath, obviously, is the most personal action you're doing, so that's why it's
a good way to reveal this, because really, your whole life, like you can be breathing
and breathing, but okay, forget about it, and actually say you don't know any chemistry
and stuff, so you don't think about oxygen or carbon dioxide or anything else, just
have the phenomena, like mindfulness of the clear air passage in your body, that's
where your life depends on, and if something obstructs it internally, your life's ending,
done, and you have not say in it.
If your heart stops pumping, no one breathing can help you, if your lungs get constricted
or collapse or something, you're done, if something just blocks these tubes, you're done,
and you're a great volition of this, like that, it's all secondary to it, and that's
what you want to see.
It extends.
Hence, you do mindfulness rightly, full dispassion, full recognition of death, the nature
of death, and the urgency, the urgency is automatic.
You see the full extent of your control, as still being secondary to the fact that you
depend upon that, which is not in your control, so you see your control has not been in your
control.
And that's why I'm going to give that, as an alternative to a subarm, not a musatian
song.
My answer to any of this also is, like, you know, let's say, Maran and Lucidie, obviously,
if you're just trying to do it off the bat, you still have all the other assumptions,
you know, other things, I present a lot of them, like, I assume material in my thoughts
or whatever kind of change there, and that's why I think you're trying to do us to come
first.
Oh, yeah, well, you know, that's what we assumed in this talk, now, I hope you can do
anything wrongly, anyway, so basically, yeah, you need to have the wrong view, and then
if you do it like this, it will be, it will lead to the result of full dispassion, you
won't lead you in itself, in the same sense, if you do Maran, Maran sati correctly, yeah,
it will lead you to our engine, but if you don't do it correctly, you won't.
Lisa, I'm going to suggest with that, basically, it's also the same principle, basically,
you get more and more, see the general level of your experience, in what way, would you
just see that bridging and ring out, basically, there's information that we see for the
feelings and then the mind.
Sure, yeah, as I said before, you can't do it, that doesn't mean you have to, every next
breath, do it differently, you can just be breathing, as long as you're breathing mindfully.
Is it a matter of choice for five?
No, the point is to maintain the mindfulness of that principle, no, like going far with
some repetition or something.
And if you're just sort of feeling fine, you're just sort of mind fine.
As long as the mindfulness is sort of slipping, or you're getting whatever, or you don't
have any of the same sharpness, or you're not maintaining the same vision of the expression
and your life, depending upon its fellow circumstances, right there, simultaneously present
with you controlling your breath and so on, controlling in a sense of intentional, evolationally
breathing in and out, then, yeah, then you keep it, that's what I said, you keep it active,
and you don't change it up, and you just introduce more, to engage you more, to keep your
mind for more.
And then the sutra continues all the way to the dispassion, evolation, and your other,
almost feels like it's stages, and then it then goes to the stage of...
Well, everything is presented like the stages, as I said.
The casinos are presented as stages, but they're not stages in that manner.
Exactly, so how far you can take it, and that's where the results to, but you don't have
to take it that far.
Like, as I said, the first journey is sufficient for our energy, because that's already the
principle of establishment of the mind, rightly, or you can go all the four.
So this is the same, but that's the whole point.
The four foundations of mindfulness gets fully developed, and the one who does the unappreciated
rightly, and then the dispassion, and this is a journey, and this is the result of that.
So we're just more like, absolute personal inclination, yeah, and you can also choice
towards...
It is choice, yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Because, yeah, if you think you get tired, or start to talk, then you need something more
particularly, because just for breathing in general, you know, breathing, thinking of your
body, breathing, looking at your mind, like, get more involved in that sense, or just
breathing right now, if you're mindful enough, but mindful enough in regard to the principle
of your life, depending upon that, which is an artinial control, while you're breathing
there, and then...
So...
Notion theory, notion abstraction, right there, while I'm breathing in, while I'm breathing
out, start discerning that external direction, so to speak, you can't see that domain upon
which your life depends, because there will only be a form of accessing that domain.
You just have a recognition that this radioactive breathing that is keeping your life and your
body functioning and everything else is basically liable to things that are not in your control
thus, your life is liable to things that are not in your control thus, your life cannot
be in your control thus, you having a passion and desire towards anything that's dependent
upon their life, are your senses, your sensuality, sensual desires, satisfaction, pleasures,
cannot possibly occur.
I think one of the general things people use to send their practice to do is they feel
like the meditation is successful or I study successful and it's pleasant, as you can
feel it's a different pleasant than doing something wrong.
I find it because an instruction for suggestion is, I breathe in, experiencing venture,
especially joy, as they're feeding session, so you kind of have an argument to see that
you feel good.
Why?
Because if you look at the other things, then you might be jumping over cliffs, like I
stay dead.
Well, intentionally look at the, because it doesn't matter actually, still the nature
of the feeling is there.
So yeah, intentionally keep your body calm, focus on the rapture and stuff, why are you maintaining
the principle of death in your life not being in your control?
Because otherwise, you might sort of make the mind decide, oh, I had enough of this and
then I'm still thinking that they're done.
But yeah, important of being always letting, I don't know, experiencing rapture, no, I'm
just going to go into it, oh yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, no, the
pleasure is not any measure whatsoever of your progress, it's basically that kind of
inshakable, unshakable nature of the composure and the peace in the face of death, which is
not pleasant, but that this pleasure cannot overwhelm your mind and that's pleasant.
But if you're just looking out to some sort of rapture, or rapture and excitement or something
while you're looking more at least, well, you're certainly using it out for the long reasons.
Yeah, or if you look at it at the end, the contemplating phenomenon, things like impermanence,
I don't know if they use it in each of them, but that's it.
Well, they were using Sajipatana, and it does say that Sajipatana will be brought to
you if you look at it in quality of it, in each of them.
No.
While you're being converted, cessation or de-creation, is the idea that one works, is it?
But decreasing or intensifying?
Yeah.
They are rising and falling, whatever.
I was ceasing and then disfession, you know.
There's the revolution and the liberation, the delinquishing's detachment.
And there are many more students, like when it says highly experienced delinquishing and detachment
or dispassion and revulsion, but seeing that it's horrible, it's perilous, it's dangerous,
it's a trap.
So the mind pulls away from it, turns away from it.
Like a man being carried to a pit full of burning ambers.
He might as well be in every other direction except there was burning ambers.
He wants to be everywhere else except there.
And that's what Anabalusati provides you with, if that's right or not.
Because it is the very core of your experience, so to speak, given spatially speaking,
like the breathing, the center of your body, the center of your...
Well, so it appears, the center of your point of view, the center of me.
So basically, you are prudent from right there.
And then there's nothing you can take.
As yours, once you've given up, the ownership of your breath through a stringent system.
But...
Exactly.
Through seeing that your control, your intention is only very relative,
and given, which means it's not fundamentally your control.
So that's the wrong...
You might feel...
Yeah, the point is in the right order.
My sense of screenings, pointings in the right order.
Seeing where the breath, your control is rooted.
Yeah.
The body, element, whatever, or experience, it's feelings being there, mind being there.
Yeah.
So, as you said the other day, it's not being...
It's coming from a different direction.
That intention itself is not...
It's not created independently by myself.
Right.
Exactly.
I see ways come from...
Right.
Then you see that whatever else is here, on biggest, in general,
in not clear, in vague,
which is the same nature as everything, or these things that are understood.
So you don't have to chase your sense of self.
You get...
You get surfacted by that kind of blanket application of that principle.
Yeah.
I'll give that example before I can't do politics.
You don't necessarily...
No.
I don't know.
Which bacteria is sort of causing the problem by taking the general one.
You know, well, whatever it was, it was also affected by this.
But that's only possible when you have the right principle.
That's why the right view has to come first.
You can't just be doing mindfulness of breathing and expecting.
I mean, you should be trying, anyway.
You know, even conclusion should be trying to understand things.
Understand the nature of satipatana, understand the nature of feelings,
the nature of suffering, the nature of freedom from it.
Yeah, absolutely.
But don't fool yourself about it.
You cannot do it rightly if you know what right away it is.
Yeah, you can.
I did that.
I did that.
I did that.
Closer you go.
Yeah.
It is a degree of trial and error.
Yeah.
That's why again, as I said, the closest comes to some sort of method,
this constant strike.
Relentless.
And even you're resting, don't give up the mindfulness.
So, if you're resting, don't give up the mindfulness.
So, if you're resting, don't give up the mindfulness.
If you're resting, don't give up the mindfulness.
So, it's turning, it's seeing the structure correctly.
All the other things, correctly, but where everything's rooted,
it's pushing that center out of center.
Well, it's just an armating.
It's just, I mean, the center, faith is well gone.
Like the notion of center cannot even be conceived anymore.
The notion of I am the center.
That's why that sort of one cannot think like the Tujan anymore.
He can remember around the world, but he can't think like...
He was going to think that the center is over there.
No, no, no, no.
Because in order for you to center something,
means you need to have what you need to have the space around it
to put it in a center.
But his whole direction is out of your control.
And you can't even access it.
Thus, whenever the center might be, it's on the other side.
Which means it's not really a center,
because there will only require the assumption of certain space.
And this precedes that.
So then it's just center less.
I eat self less.
Yeah, that's where you get your idea.
It was, you know, whatever's in front.
It's just, however far you go,
it can never be yours.
No, yeah, yeah.
Well, basically, the front behind up and down
before or after all of that
is already secondary to that,
because of which your life is there,
determined as it is,
to that upon which your life depends.
And even you have a notion of my life depends upon something.
That's already within that,
upon which your life depends.
In other words, any spatial direction,
any time application,
I thought, it's already within that.
And there is no outside of it
that you can possibly conceive.
There is no outside of the five aggregates.
So what you can do is experience this passion towards it,
because you know that it's liable to things
that are not in your control,
because of which this,
which is your in control,
is in your control,
it's not really in your control,
because if you were,
you would be controlling its fate as one.
It's the same principle,
like the body is liable to sickness,
thus it's not mine.
Like, anybody, everyone understands their thoughts,
in a way, to a degree.
But it's, if you really,
to understand their thoughts,
you would fully let go of sensuality
and become ungodly.
It's the same thought.
It's just taken to a different extent.
So, they, their thoughts,
and paired with their alanseness,
drilling, and not resting.
And yet, you'll be free from sensuality,
even as a protugina.
That's how they're likely to remain protugina.
Because you have plenty of down-instruction around you.
And it's the same principle
that you apply to the mind,
the notion of space,
the notion of time,
the notion of thoughts,
intentions, again,
rooted,
or rather depend upon that,
which you cannot even conceive of,
think of.
Because of that,
so do you.
You, you, you, you, you,
you still use it,
but you have, uh,
but enough extinguished
any notions of ownership
in regard to it.
In the same sense,
you extinguish the
any notion of ownership
in regard to the book,
and what both it provides.
And we're also in the other nights,
like, I was in a,
in the car,
I'm not doing any in the car.
Car manipulation.
Existing.
Existing.
No, yeah.
Yeah, it's closed.
They're just feeding the car,
moving past all.
Yeah, moving.
And,
because it's,
it's really, uh,
political.
Oh, yeah.
And feeling of,
you could get it.
And the mind automatically was,
I'm, I'm moving away from this.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The mind doesn't want to think that,
because it's,
it's threatening.
Because the mind is still
driven by fear,
or can be driven by fear,
or it doubts
whether it can be driven by fear.
So it fears it,
which means it's driven by fear.
If my doubts,
whether the fear can penetrate it,
it's penetrated by fear.
The doubt,
cause,
like, created the bridge,
so to speak.
But the only way to free yourself,
in doubt,
is to train your mind
in regard to fear.
So maybe,
I don't,
I don't know,
this is different fear.
I mean, like,
when you see the possibility,
uh-huh.
You see,
when I see it,
if I'm here,
hey, this is me.
That's a problem.
Oh, right, right.
Well,
if I get answered,
speak detached.
Oh, I see.
Yeah, mind from that.
Right.
Is there any?
There is just,
there is an experience,
in a sense of,
yeah, a very dangerous
parenthesis,
close to that experience.
But even that,
it's not mine.
Yes, I guess.
Well, if you stick to that,
even when you're not just in the car,
you,
you would be basically practicing
this passion correctly,
which means sooner or later,
it would take root
more and more,
and become self-apparent.
Yeah,
it's also very well
back to the breath.
You know,
I was saying,
what is crucial,
actually,
feeling unpleasant feeling?
To me,
then, actually,
it feels kind of,
firstly,
you can do a mindfulness,
and it's not so much like,
I feel certain,
that I'm feeling,
which is just mindfulness
becomes like,
the feeling is present.
Yeah.
And also, when you were
talking about, like,
the dying process,
everything is slightly
the body is shutting down,
like, everything becomes
unpleasant,
and the mind moves away
from anything
unpleasant,
and I don't know,
certain body parts,
you know,
just drones,
and then it should,
even the breathing becomes,
well, even the mind,
even the thought itself becomes
unpleasant,
and that's why, like,
the dying man has only
wisdom to rely upon,
if he has developed it,
if he hasn't,
he would be an ultimate
despair,
which is why that is so hard,
and difficult,
as an experience.
But wisdom,
not being dependent upon any,
any phenomena,
upon the basic,
on six senses,
but it's in regard to the
six senses,
the five senses in the mind,
that's what it says,
that's where the
peace is,
that's where the equilibrium is,
that's where not fear,
lack of fear is,
that's where our
energy is really,
our energy is really,
so death,
no death,
makes no difference,
mind doesn't pick on anything,
doesn't intrude
anything,
so it doesn't get reborn,
done?
As with the thinking,
like,
sometimes we're talking about
a peaceful death,
actually,
all we do is
like,
and the death has to be
unpleasant.
Well,
the only peaceful death
is
Farraham's death.
Yes.
There's no such thing
as peace from death.
No, that's one,
isn't it?
Yes.
Some people say,
though,
I'm a child about
how to prepare people
to have a peaceful death.
I'm
just saying,
if anyone correctly,
he also saw the
peace,
just about to be
slaughtered with a smile
on the face.
So,
we just appear
well,
this
doesn't
move
at this moment.
Just something
that's
different.
You know,
the experience of the
body,
we're talking about
content being
pressure,
isn't it?
So, it could be,
like, the body
pressure,
okay,
and feelings
could use it to
touch it,
to touch it,
experience.
As
a musical
sound,
I don't
know.
I just
can't
I just thought
of that word,
but it's like
the thing is, yeah.
I mean,
maybe it means for
something more,
but someone
is a
designation.
I don't know.
He's a
problem
I have to
qualify.
Maybe
I'll think
of that more,
but he has feelings
more.
So, I don't
experience.
Well,
you can,
you can,
but it doesn't
mean that for you,
it doesn't
stand closer
to that which
feeling is,
then if you
is designation
feeling.
So, yeah.
It's fine.
Call it
whatever you want
with it.
The mind
being
shaped.
Well, sure.
Yeah.
The general
is
as it takes it.
Yeah.
It's
abundant pressure.
But,
but one thing,
like, I'm,
well, I'm
going to say,
yes, you don't
mean that, but I think
it's just useful to
call it.
Like, when you say
mind is a
shape, that doesn't,
doesn't mean
you can see that
shape externally.
It means you just
find that
shape.
Find
the experience
shape.
Which means that's
what the mind is at
time.
You can't have
step outside the mind.
You see the mind is
such.
Like, all
my mind is such
shape.
No, excuse me.
Yeah.
No, I'm not taking
external view
and saying this.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So you can't
describe it.
Sure.
Yeah.
And that's what's
out the colonel does.
He knows his mind.
As expanded mind.
As struck me.
As depressed mind.
As enlightened mind.
As light mind.
As heavy mind.
Whatever.
Because you can use
very general
designations because
those you can't
have more particular
ones.
Could be if I'm
saying I'm
paying attention to
that.
That's why I'm trying
just.
Well, I'm not.
Just editing what
arises.
Is it right?
Good.
Good.
Very thoroughly.
And seeing that as
the approach
is the foundation
for the measurements
of this attention
to breathe,
calmly.
Okay.
Maybe I get it.
Yep.
And so, wherever
arises.
So, when I'm looking
shape to make this shape. I'm looking at my intention. And I can see the shape around
it. So you discern the shape as a given one. Yeah, yeah. But on a more, on a more
practical, it's probably a bit more useful for why the audience, I guess, would be, not
getting too abstract about this shape, but just discerning the shape, or rather discerning
the mind affected by sensuality. Well, discerning the mind, not affected by sensuality, discerning
the mind affected by the will, discerning the mind, not affected by the will, discerning
the mind affected by delusion, by non-delusion. That's kind of very fundamental. Discerning
the mind affected by pleasure, affected by displeasure. Because none of those shapes of the mind
responded to this, so that are kind of impersonal, so to speak. They're all being felt. I had a
pleasure in the Quran, but whether it's a pleasure caused by the peace, freedom, or it's a pleasure
caused by the prospect of sensuality, elation, delight, which means it's a pleasure really.
So you want to see that, because like you might not be engaging in any sensual acts, you
might be well-restrained, but the mind is still affected by the possibility of sensual
pleasure that you are welcoming. So you want to be stopped. You want to stop the welcoming.
You want to undermine the possibility of pleasure affecting you. You can't undermine
the possibility of pleasure. You can't undermine eyes seeing things that they will find
agreeable. Here's hearing sounds that they will find agreeable, for as long as you have
eyes ears and other senses. What you can do is, on the level of their mind, free your
mind from the welcoming and delighting in the possibility of being so. And then, whatever
is particularly, you can't give in. Because possibilities are more general, more fundamental
than the particular arising of any of them. So if your mind is free from possibility
of delighting in pleasure, you cannot actually delight in any pleasure right there and then.
So you have been dispassionates in regards to? That's what I expect is a lot of kindness,
for example, the matter you say. Basically, you have surmounted the possibility of your
mind giving in to the will. Welcome in your will. They can join your will. Engaging in
your will. You have removed that. Thus, automatically, your experiencing meant indirectly, your
experience meant, you're not forcing anything. So, layer. You, you, you, the focus of attention
of your breathing or whatever. And when you see the peripheral sort of experiences,
a whole notion of the mind there, see, is there liable to sensuality? Like, if you have
sensual thought now, will it cause the delight and excitement? And welcoming. Yeah, that's
where the problem is. So you want to remove that on that peripheral level. But if I'm
not delighting. Yeah, you can remove the actual possibility where you can remove your delight
in it. And if you stop delighting the possibility of sensuality, you cannot possibly engage in
it then in it actually. But in particular. I mean, my mind is breathing is doing any way
to just focus on it. Yeah, yeah. I know. I'm just, you started talking about the mind
and the shape of it. And I'm just telling you rather than there is a risk of getting lost
in abstract if you start sort of drawing lines and shapes and stuff. I mean, it, for some
people, it might work in the same manner, but the point is dispassion. The point is non-sensuality.
So if you're thinking about the shapes of your mind, it should lead to dispassion. If it's
not, you're not thinking about it. You can't just do dispassion. Well, you could theoretically,
if you say no on the right peripheral level. Peripherally, if you say no. Not just if you
say no actually, and then hope that everything else will get affected by it. Okay, yeah,
when you're talking about peripherals, proper minds. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. I'm not involved
in that. Yeah. Yeah. No, but you're probably seeing it. Peripherally renouncement. I might
fully see it and might fully renounce it. This isn't it? Possibility. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
The distance, whether in the mind is actually good. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Is it still liable
to it? Because you are responsible for that. You know, responsible for eyes, finding certain
things agreeable, certain things disagreeable. But you are responsible for maintaining the
notions of delight and assumptions in your mind, which then keep the minds susceptible
and liable to changes of weather, changes of mood, of sexuality, of your will, of delusion,
of complacency. That's a new. So when the mind is bright and mindful, you look at the
nature of that and then try to sort of spread, so to speak, on that peripheral level,
that nature further and further and further, until you can understand how it can become
impanetrable to the possibility of sexuality. You cannot prevent possibility of sexuality
arising and manifesting itself, but you can certainly train your mind to turn away
from it, to stop delighting it, stop welcoming it, stop assuming it as good.
So the possibility always comes first before the actual engagement. Sure. Well, not comes
first in the sense of first, second, the single thing is present with the actual engagement,
but it precedes it more generally. It's more fundamental because it does. Yeah. Just
not delighting in that. Yeah. So you know, nothing specific, nothing specific, just the
possibility of enjoying pleasure based upon body. That's it. Don't go there. No, no, no,
no, no, no, no, no. It's not like going there or not going there. That thing has already
risen, so you just like stop welcoming that, stop regarding it as much and stop finding
it agreeable. Stop not seeing it as dangerous. Because you're not seeing it as dangerous,
automatically, you're welcoming it. But only how to see it as dangerous, you are not
welcoming. Not more than that man will welcome the pitful burning embers. That's often in
the source of the danger we can apparent and the mind will liberate it. Because the danger
is there. It's actual dangerous. You're not contriving, you're not fabricating any danger.
You might have to do so initially so they can correspond to the actual danger that can
then be discerned. But it is actually dangerous. Laughter and dangerous. Just essential thought,
let alone essential action. Because it's, yeah, it's crap, it's the story of wisdom. No,
because it's dangerous. That's it. You don't have to give reasons. Well, all that is
in the level of reasoning, which means all that is not directly seeing the danger. You
want to see the danger as danger. Then you can reason only one. Not only that. So think
about the phenomenon of danger. How do I get there as a danger to your life now, right
here? How would you feel? That's how you should feel when the sensual thought arises,
in the same manner. Like your life is on the line.
Sensual thought, not any thought, not any agreeable thought. Just a thought pertaining to the
pleasure based upon body. You're going to become neurotic about it either in the sense
of like nothing, a javelinous accept, and everything is dangerous. Yeah. Yeah, all
some things are. No, if the demand is, no thinking, no, no thinking, any, any essential
things, any is at the same time, withdrawing itself from being, from being sort of allowable
to the touch or the possibility of the sensual things, basically, it cannot be touched by
the possibilities either, even if they are arising, even on the level of mind, a thought of pleasure,
doesn't pull them on towards their pleasure. That's fine. You don't have to keep pressing
it further. Keep it there. This was there. Stand it there. That's actually the first
question. So when I say the surmounting, the possibilities of sensual pleasure, that's
what the suitors, when they talk about preventing the other reason and wholesome states from
arising. You prevent them by not delighting in the possibility of them. Basically, other
reason and wholesome states are the possibilities of the sensuality, which is unwholesome, are
the possibilities of unwholesome, be it sensuality or your work. So another reason unwholesome
equals possibility of unwholesome. And that's where you basically, on that level, you free
your mind from it. And if the mind is free on the level of the other reason states of
unwholesome nature, then the mind cannot be controlled, touched or engaged with the states
that are actually right in front of you for a reason. And the maintenance of wholesome
states. Again, it's again easy in regards to the unwholesome state. The possibility of
the wholesome state, that's what you're training in regard to. And that's how you maintain
the actual reason wholesome states. As seen in a danger, seeing the precise gratification.
Well, see the danger in being liable to the arising of the unwholesome states of unwholesome
nature. See the danger in the possibility of unwholesome affecting you.
You actually gratification. And the sure, in there is a month. Yeah. Yeah. Would you be
deriving the possibility of unwholesome? Delighting. Well, not in a sensual manner. In order
to welcome. Well, not deriving is the also. Yeah, exactly. You might want it, but then
wanting will be on the level of wisdom. Like wanting eyes and recognizing this is liberation,
this is the free, this is escape. Yeah, chandelier. Yeah, exactly. You can go both ways. See.
