So, that's what I was going to ask, what do you think about the empires, the basis for
potency, the kitchen of your environment, as potency, people join their powers, or basis
of spiritual powers?
It's really concerned, well, it seems to be initially concerned with who's getting spiritual
powers. It's strange to me to be talking about that, but what it is is desire, energy,
tension is on, and amongst these four bases which have plus the determinations of striving,
which is the four right efforts, and the composure days based on that will attain this composure
to that composure. You can build mastery of the body, you have these spiritual powers, you
can fly, whatever. And then it says, you know, it gets rid of all the tanks coming home.
Do you understand that, because you know, this is not an analysis, so these four bases of
potency may develop and cultivate and upgrade fruit benefits.
A big big advantage for basis for spiritual power, that's a basis for potency. It's
because there is a spiritual spiritual power, you know, that for this is composure due to
desire and determinations of striving. Thus my, many things, thus my desire will neither
be too slack nor too tense, and it will be neither constricted internally nor distracted
externally, nor dwells perceiving, after and before, as before, so after, as after, so
before, as below, so above, as above, so below, as day, as by day, so at night, so as night,
so by day. But as you can, as you can see from there, basically it's like the ultimate
clear perspective. That is, then the mind is composed upon.
Well, as you said, this is just one last thing, you know, many of the first cross ones
that we said, that's because the mind is open and envelopes, the develops, the mind
gives them luminously. Right. That's it. So basically, I mean, the
approach that is dealing with others, but obviously the Iran is the same, the same thing
of, of like an establishment of mind on a certain clarity that depends on a certain
generality of that mindfulness in their level. Each, as if for some people establishing
the mind in such manner would also result as other sort of say, if there is an opening
like in the service translation, what is often gained in these powers?
Or hypotheses. But they are basically gained on the foundations of that clear
perspective that's actually the foundation of wisdom. So if somebody develops
wisdom in their right manner, plus has these openings, they'll get these special
powers. Or if somebody aims at a special powers through gaining wisdom, well,
you'll have to go through developing that wisdom and knowledge based on the clear
perspective. And then the powers will be seconded, it really.
This whole thing is about, no argument, just the keen earnestness,
earnest, putting forth an age you too, I understand.
Yeah, because you've got to go out the mind. Yeah, because you have one goal,
one thing going to the goal. And actually, people use this suit as this
Buddhist teaching as a way to succeed in anything new.
Oh, right. It's right over there.
The power for base to success. Right.
The beginning of what it is. Yeah, of course.
You need that same. Well, perspective and wisdom will help you with whatever
that. Obviously, it's not. It's not the end of it.
Because it's clearly talked about the terminations of striving in terms of
getting rid of an awesome quality for identity. With that,
you say, with that is coupled with that desire, coupled with that investigation
energy in the result. No, definitely.
The determination of striving was simply basically the energy.
It's the main factor of very much among the main factors.
Because it's at that constant, underlanting effort to the minds
putting in. That's basically how the world gets done.
I think I told you that before, if there is a closest to a method of practicing
the download, that would be the method of just not pressing
mentally as in possibly striving mentally to understand.
Not striving blindly to some mechanical sort of repetition of some
motions, but striving mentally to clear out the mind from my
wholesome states, whether you're sitting, walking, standing or laying
down, whether you're going in the mud, tripping the leaves,
walking, because it basically, no matter what you're doing, externally,
internally, the mind maintains the same proportion, the same attitude,
which is not bothered at anything of wholesome, and understand the
wholesome, basically.
Whereas the one who said, like the monk, like one, he's keen,
he doesn't leave anything out. He doesn't leave anything unturned.
So he does everything and investigates the meaning, everything until he gets
a clarity. Like the other source has dealt with a knife, like
cutting and getting in further and further and further, until things become
very, very clear. Or the other source, the butcher, skilled butcher,
cutting up a cow. And in the beginning, you just see this mountain
mass, sort of, of organs and stuff, but the skilled butcher is
capable of cutting it all out. And as he's cutting it bit by bit, he's
understanding what does phenomena. Now, that needs to be qualified.
It's understood in that mindful, phenomenological way, not in an
analytic way, as in you divide into 16 conformance and memorize them
and suddenly think that's not understanding. That's just collecting
information. So in the proper sense, you basically keep pushing
things until the clarity is reached.
There's always having to go in mind.
Well, there's one goal in mind, basically.
Three of the top rankings.
If he ain't known, it's going to be striving in this way
without the government. Well, of course, yeah.
So you have to understand what you have to get some degree of
understanding, as I said, so to say again, you hear the teaching and
you measure the task, basically means you get the idea of what
needs to be done. And that's how you're around the energy
you're doing it. That's why people can't.
They're very keen, very inspired, but they can't get the energy
because they don't really know what it's supposed to do.
They're attracted from one meditation technique to the other,
from one teach to the other. But deep inside, they really don't know
for themselves what they're supposed to do.
And for as long as that's the case, they won't have the energy
to do it.
Yeah, you have to have something.
It's going to be broken, you know, all the time.
The chanting is going to be.
Well, can you show the ears, but you don't want to be defending
on that. You don't want to be defending on something
poking you. You want to be poking yourself.
And basically getting the energy going in that manner.
As in, so like, taking up, becoming a monk.
As in, well, sure. But no, I mean more particularly,
as in like, if you're sitting around, don't let your mind wander
thinking lazy thoughts, but pick up something you haven't understood,
something you think you're in this way, but just keep drilling.
And then it'll pick itself up. The momentum will take over.
But not before you invest in that sort of whining up.
You're somebody who says, that's the urgency of ages.
I think it's going to make him do the methods.
Yeah, I guess so.
Yeah, because it seems, because you can become complacent here
with, like, the government asked him,
and he said, okay, I'm not happy with being a good enough monk.
Yeah.
It's so easy, he's the guest.
He's used to live a lot to do something.
You're not exposed to anything.
Well, I mean, yeah, but that is just like,
that's your undoing.
Basically, because no matter how comfortable or agreeable
circumstances are, the fact is what you're still subject to death,
illness, dissolution, and everything else.
So you just have to be thinking about those things,
and you will be coming out complacency soon enough.
But it's that lazy attitude, mental laziness, indulgence,
complacency that prevents you or other takes away from thinking
those thoughts, and then you don't even.
And the further away you go, the harder it becomes to think those thoughts,
because then you have to make more effort to think that.
If I may, this segue is nicely into one of my questions.
This could dimensions.
I was ethereal being too strained versus too lax.
The other sit, I always remember about it,
is like the one we're in, but it's talking to some musician.
He said, as you can, there are strings too tight for the loose.
Yeah.
So I guess the question is, like, if you can just speak more about,
maybe, practical, so to say, you know,
finding the middle between, like, you know,
putting forth so much energy that it becomes, like, restless,
and kind of, like, a little nutty versus, like, saying,
oh, you know, as you say, often you have to keep drilling,
and then you can fall into the blaze, like, oh, you know,
you just have to kind of wait around for it,
which is falling into that complacent.
Well, the thing is, yeah, especially in the beginning,
you might be getting restless and so on,
but even nutty, but it's not only the world,
even if you do, as long as you're starting
and doing it for the right reasons,
and along with our lines, as in,
you're really trying to understand the sort of,
in that case, sort of picking up some metals
and becoming a robot or something,
and then get completely obsessed with that.
So it has to be, that's what I say,
so the method, so you can't just keep repeating it,
you can't do it the same every day,
because different things arise in your experience,
which means you need to look at them differently,
you need to, so that, which is in common to your efforts,
is that desire to understand,
desire to reach a clarity of the phenomena,
or the feeling, intention, perception,
basically suffering, freedom from it,
the form of the truth, whatever you want to call it.
It's the same insight, so,
if you're doing it rightly,
you would see that basically,
you can't do too much of it,
as in, you might get tired,
so you can't keep actively making effort to understand,
but the state of not making the effort mentally,
does not need to lead to the state of being
relaxed and complacent either.
So yeah, you don't have to be actively pursuing,
but you can remain mindful,
and you can't have too much of that mindfulness.
It's basically the other,
it's when people don't see everyone, that's the problem,
it's not that they make too much effort,
it's when they stop making the effort,
they don't stay on that mindfulness, which is neutral,
then they go completely the opposite way.
Oh, I made the effort, now I get too relaxed,
because of the effort they made.
So, you need to find,
you need to learn how to,
how to rest,
because it is a restful place in that mindfulness,
not in the distraction,
not in the senses,
not in the sensuality,
which is usually what people use
for the restful place of their mind.
Well, I've been working hard,
now I'm gonna put my feet up,
and really, you know,
have a drink and just relax,
or go out with a friend,
or do something,
and that's what it relaxes people,
the sensuality,
but actually that's not relaxing at all.
But, for the mind who has that
as a starting point,
it will take some effort
into relearning what's true,
a relaxation is which is basically mindfulness,
the practice of mindfulness,
which is nothing other than samadhi.
So, when you're not actually pursuing
the understanding of the meaning,
but you remain on that basis
upon which the understanding of the meaning occurs.
So, that's why even if you're not actually pursuing it,
the development of that basis,
so that samadhi,
will bring the clarity eventually,
and a slow rate of still.
Yeah, the composure, yes.
Good, but the rest in touch are mindfulness screening.
Yeah, exactly.
Because that's the thing,
like, it can make too much effort,
too little effort, doesn't matter.
There will vary on your end of the day
what you have to do,
but there is no excuse for being mindful.
Actually, there is no excuse for that.
So, there is no excuse
for allowing your mind to rest
on unholesome things,
because not resting on unholesome things,
it's not actually touched them at all.
But it states that it's the assumption of sensuality
that it requires us to,
well, that sort of makes us,
or maintains the belief that,
resting means when you get the pleasure
of the senses or distraction.
But it's not.
But that they stand to unlearn.
To relate it to a summary,
you've used this word with, like,
you know, when you're mindful,
and there's nothing particularly on the whole sum,
it's like watching cows in a field,
like a chase absolutely,
to see if they're there, just doing their thing.
But people perhaps say,
I don't know if I don't look at the cows at all,
and they're off my mind,
they don't have to worry,
but then anything can happen.
Well, exactly.
Yeah, yeah.
So, you don't want to be
counting and strangling a cow
in terms of trying to control it,
nor do you want to be looking completely elsewhere
where you don't even see a cow.
So then that's the whole point of mindfulness,
giving that perspective
where you can see it,
without actually having to chase it,
or hold it down.
And yeah, no matter how tired you are,
physically or mentally,
mindfulness is never cause of that tiredness,
nor can I be an impediment to rest.
You could basically say,
you remind a lot of I'm tired.
Absolutely.
And that's already quite a wholesome way
of resting.
So if you're established
of a mindfulness correctly,
you can never kind of veer off too much
of the right track.
You can't forget.
Well, you can't.
You can't get too warmed up
and restless,
nor can you get too careless in central.
This is,
when you've got this,
there's already
any explanation,
and how big is does it be cool,
as well,
receiving after and before,
before and after,
as not as after and before?
Yeah, because the perception
of after and before is well brought
by a big alternative,
well considered,
penetrating by wisdom.
Just in that one.
And that's it.
Okay.
So?
Before and after.
What?
Well,
do you have anything specifically
before and after?
Who told you some sound?
Well, no, no.
Did you do that?
No, no.
Just before a phenomenon
before and after.
Before this and after this,
past and future,
up and down,
above or below.
Basically, the point is
getting the perspective
and your experience as a whole.
Now, just what's here now,
and what has been,
if you think about past,
what will be,
if you think about the future,
that's all already present
in the present.
So, as before,
after this is what he clearly understood,
as after so and before.
Yeah.
And that's where he goes to be
thinking about contemplating,
because if you're looking
to clear the self-management,
please,
you see what has happened
before.
And you can see the possibilities.
Well, I'm just sure,
but it's not the particular,
you don't pick up particular things
of your past,
and then you think about it
and learn from it,
and introduce some sort of information
that can help you.
And yet, that's fine.
But this refers to
the actual framework
called before,
a framework of after.
On a very general level
of that perspective,
that's why it's listed there
with those things.
Not like with things
just remember what you've done,
remember what you might do.
Yeah.
Before and after.
For as long as there is now,
there will be before.
So as long as there is now,
there will be after.
It's not like
that they're all free
at the same time.
It's not like before,
now and after.
Why is this coming?
Why is it?
Well,
because all the assumptions
they are assumed in the past,
because all the other habits,
they're not existing
for the future,
they're presently present.
That's why.
Because they're like,
when other hand becomes
another hand,
even when he thinks of himself,
at the time he was put to dinner,
even that,
he's not his self anymore.
He doesn't even take
the past self as his self.
Why?
Because he has presently understood
the nature of self
as truly not self.
Okay.
So he's taking this phenomenon
and living in it.
Yeah.
So anything before,
anything before,
just a framework of before.
So a framework of after.
There's after,
so before,
basically,
you apply that perspective,
that perspective,
that perspective,
in all directions,
so to speak.
Now just right here,
I'm not what I'm seeing,
what I'm hearing,
what I'm mindful of,
but any thoughts of past,
any thoughts of the future,
everything becomes included
in that perspective.
Clearly.
No, okay.
Could you have,
obviously,
have that thought of yourself?
You will.
They always,
always,
always in the future.
Yeah.
Every point of view,
as Annabella said,
has, like,
either under-determined
or over-determined
aspect to it,
which means,
depending on how you're looking,
you're only looking to,
like,
either seeing your past
represent,
or you're looking
in the future through your present.
And that's all present.
Doing something now,
with this,
future in mind.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Or you have some thoughts
with you now,
which, basically,
are kind of lingering
from something
there was before.
That is also present,
as before,
now.
And explain to the other,
think,
PROJECCDULORN
as a big draw,
as below,
is a little further about the
figure that is completely
your experience of the body depends. So you can take one part, you'll have to take 32, but if you would take all the parts that were there that can be taken, you'll have 32.
So the body is the body as a whole, the experience of the body as a whole. You don't leave anything out or down left or right.
You don't leave anything out to bring out that body, everything is dependent upon that body, which is included by including that body.
So it dwells, it dwells. Yeah, it dwells not resting upon anything, not picking up anything, not assuming anything, not taking up anything.
Interns spatially, and in terms of temporally, before or after, tens of time, and in terms of space above or below in regard to this, before or after in regard to this.
So the same thing really just pertains to two different phenomena, but the same as it should. Not as it can be this one.
As it by day is so at night, so it's night so by day, it develops the basis forms, you know, the prosceness is composure due to desire and termination of striving, by way of the same qualities, the same features, the same as this, as it develops that basis form.
You can see by day, it does not exist. Yeah, no difference. It doesn't really strive.
And then, with the mind, it's open and uninvolved. Developed the mind and used the monocity. Here we use the perception of light as well, to ask.
Luminosity, which basically should be to say there's a non-indicative. I, not pointing at anything, not resting at anything, luminous all around.
It means basically not picking up anything in any direction. So I'm going back to it. I'm just saying that you can't use the word luminous, but you have to determine what it is, in what sense it's luminous.
It's in a sense, it's a non-indicative thing. Because if you're just to be luminous all around, you think of consciousness being this bright light that shines, and that you're entering this extra plane of permanent light and beauty, or something like that is up.
It really doesn't indicate anything anywhere, before or after, up or down, as a resting point, as a sense of self, as something you will lean on.
Hence that infinity of that structure shines everywhere and nowhere, so to speak.
So here we use the perception of light as well, across the perception of days, while we're solved.
So it is in this way, because it's bigger with the mind, it's open, and it's empty, mind can use it.
Correct, I get that. Do you know the phenomenon of light?
Well, the phenomenon of light is negative in regards to everything that you see, when the light is present. You can't see anything, there's no light.
But what you're seeing is not light, it's the objects, or in more particular things revealed by their light.
So again, it's the same principle of a more general phenomenon upon which you start to remind, because of which you then transcend the particular phenomenon that depends directly upon it.
Everything you see depends upon light being there.
You know darkness.
Well, in a sense, yeah, the absence of light.
So you resolve upon perception of day, or perception of light, and then your mind can develop, get established upon that perception.
And at the standard for you provide you basically freedom from the pool of any particular things that you'd be seeing.
So you're viewing these thoughts, particular parts, and present thoughts.
You're reviewing them presently.
You're going to end the body, but you're striving.
Any night. The same.
Yeah, just maintaining the same attitude, regardless of what you're doing, obviously depending on what you're doing means you will have more.
You will be able to invest more or less effort in it.
But even if you're doing something that requires most of all of your attention, in that sense, you still want to compromise the mindfulness.
And restraint, which is really kind of luminosity.
Well, yeah, like on the basis of that mindfulness, your mind can get established upon luminosity.
But upon all sorts of other different establishments, they will kind of provide you with the same results.
Three of the only studies is just for different people, we work differently.
I, different people can establish upon different things more successfully.
But it's the same principle of the same establishment.
It's the same as seen as in some.
The other says it's all the different meditations.
It might just be breathing.
The different things is, I would say, different exercises in regards to the same principle.
Oh, absolutely.
And also, it's not like, for example, as it says, like the casinos, the ten casinos for example.
It's not like ten casinos.
One establishment of mind upon the casino, or one casino for all the establishments.
But then within that, you can take that same establishment, same principle, further and further and further.
Ten times, like the ten refinements to the same principle, so they're ten casinos.
It's not like they're laid out one, so you go from one, then you do the next one, then you do.
No, it's basically doing the same further and further and further.
We'll take you from the casino verse to the most refined casino consciousness.
But it's the same principle, which means you don't need all ten.
You just need one.
And you'll have all ten in a way.
And the same, same.
For every genre is the same.
Whenever in the suit, there's always a beyond this.
It's like developing the same.
How far you can go.
So the practice of genres, the casinos, the establishment of different perceptions.
It's always the same principle.
Now, principle.
It's a principle.
It's alternate.
Well, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, you can.
The principle is where the principle could be some further.
Better.
