So some people say that we only live once, so we must enjoy our lives to the fullest.
Do whatever makes us happy.
Go after our desires, try to achieve what we want to achieve.
We enjoy our lives to the fullest.
That's the idea.
That's okay.
Good late.
Well, if you're an authentic person, I mean many people say that as a formal dismissal,
are you only live once?
There's nothing you can say to them, but say people start doubting that notion of you only live once.
The fact is you don't really know how many times you live.
So as simple as that, you can't know.
You cannot know.
There are people who believe, they live only once.
There are people who believe that you live many times.
There are people who believe you live twice, such as rebirth in heaven or hell and that's it.
But the point is, it's always going to remain a matter of belief.
So if you're somebody who is trying to help yourself in an ultimate manner,
who want to develop your mind and so on, you have to recognize that and admit
that it's always going to be a matter of belief.
So when you're sure, when you feel completely confident in saying you live only once,
well, that's not true.
Because you don't know, for sure, yet you've been sure based upon a mere belief.
It's a big mistake.
It's a very risky thing to do.
So I'm not saying you should stop believing whatever you believe.
I'm just saying you have to recognize that it is a belief and it cannot be more than that.
So from that point of view, then you recognize, well, what is the safest belief I can have?
Like, if I live only once, if I believe that, okay, sure.
And then as a result of that belief, I end up behaving in this life whichever way I want.
But what if you live more than once?
And then because of your bad behavior in this life, you end up paying the price.
Because those people who do believe in future lives, be Christians or Buddhist or Hindus,
they believe that you're going to be able, accordingly, to your actions.
Even Christians, like if you're not a good Christian, having those will be close to you.
So you recognize that, okay, so the belief of more lives requires a certain degree of good behavior.
In a sense, if you don't behave well, your future lives, they're going to be very compromised.
So that's all you have to do. You don't have to go further and you have to look for a proof.
You just have to recognize it. It's a belief.
And as such, the best belief for you to adopt is the one that's safest in a long run.
As with everything else in the life, you don't want to think just for tomorrow.
Oh, I'll just steal this today. Enjoy the money.
Enjoy the money I stole tomorrow, and then they have tomorrow going to go to jail for the rest of my life.
That's a very unwise thing to do.
So in the same manner, you recognize there might be only one life, there might be more lives.
But I should assume that there are more lives in case that there are more lives,
and then I end up paying the price for my misbehavior in this life.
And that's it. And it's not exactly that you need to relinquish this life in order to gain heaven in future lives.
You just have to not behave like an animal in this life.
That's it. You just have to have a degree of virtue.
That's what everybody agrees upon.
So what is the safest route for you to go?
It's basically to believe that there are probably more lives just in case.
If they're not so bad, you behave well in this life.
People praise you. People you were trustworthy.
They trusted you. They were never laid down, but you were not a scoundrel,
not stealing, whatever cheating.
So you behave properly, and you were rewarded right away with respect,
and people wanted to help you.
And then if there were, if there are future lives, you're going to be rewarded even more,
according to those who believe in that.
If not, well, so be it.
And this whole thing like, I need to, people should do whatever makes them happy.
Probably about three quarters of people don't really know what makes them happy.
Which means for them, happiness is the experience when they're not experiencing unhappiness.
Which means for them, pursuit of happiness is actively running away from the prospect of unhappiness.
Which means your whole life revolves around running away from experiencing unpleasant feelings.
That's your definition of happiness.
Being constant, being constantly chased by unhappiness and anxiety.
Exactly, exactly.
And that's what definition of happiness becomes for people.
And if you look at it, that's exactly how people live their lives.
That's why there's so many issues in the modern society.
People with mental problems developing them too much pressure, too much stress.
They can't deal with it, medications, everything else,
vices, giving in to extreme measures, because you don't know what to do anymore.
You're proliferated in that escape so much and took it at its face.
Well, you both took it as if it's sort of a good thing.
How you just do whatever makes you happy.
What makes me happy?
Well, I'm happy when I don't experience unhappiness.
So then what must move?
I must prevent unhappiness and all cost.
And then you become very stressed.
And then sensuality becomes the only mean of gaining some degree of happiness.
But that's not happiness. That's just management of your unhappiness.
Which of course, from the point of view of that unhappiness, is happiness.
But it's a very relative happiness.
It's not really a happiness that can last.
But a happiness that lasts is one way you don't have to maintain it.
Exactly.
Well, the happiness is the happiness in itself, which means it's happiness of freedom.
Happiness of being above things that can affect you.
Not kind of happiness of necessity.
Like, I need to keep running away because it's this beast chasing me.
That's not happiness.
You might feel a relief when you feel like, oh, you're temporarily safe from the beast.
And there is happiness from the, obviously, the threat, the imminent threat of the beast attacking you.
But overall, you're still not free from the beast, which means that's only a relative happiness.
And that beast is basically any form of suffering in this life.
Internal, external, any anxiety, fear, stress, burden, loss, any of that.
It's basically an example of the beast you're running away from.
Because the mind is just at its face value.
What it does when it experiences suffering, it turns away from it.
Wants to get rid of it.
Wants to prevent it.
And then that becomes a definition of the purpose of your life, just running.
And that's why people compulsively give in to the central desire.
It's not optional.
There is no matter, oh, I will refrain from sensuality today, unless the circumstances refrain you.
That's why it's not, it's almost mandatory for people to, why?
Because they chose the path of running away.
Which equals to say they chose the path of just taking their desires at the face value.
Which means they won't be able to resist them.
And that's why you're bound.
You're bound by the desire.
You're bound by fear.
You're bound by running away from suffering.
So any happiness that you can experience is going to be within that.
Which means it's a measly happiness.
