So we've established that authenticity, self-honesty is very important.
Yes sir.
Yes sir.
But it seems a sense of shame and a fear of wrongdoing.
Perhaps the Buddha also says, you know, the guardians of the world.
Guardians of the world, yeah.
Why?
A sense of shame, fear of wrongdoing and guilt.
Is guilt the same?
He can be, yeah, sure.
Because it's...
Yeah, because I think it probably would be on the same level, is it?
But why is a sense of shame?
It's a good thing.
Well, because he prevents you from doing bad.
Doing unwholesome.
Doing things based on sensuality.
Because if you don't have that preventing you,
there's nothing stopping you.
So that's why it's good to have a sense of shame even if you don't necessarily have wisdom or restraint in place.
At least that sense of shame will keep you from becoming an animal literally,
in terms of your behavior.
So that's why it's the guardian of the world.
As the Buddha said, if there were no sense of shame,
the suns would be sleeping with mothers and sisters and fathers with daughters,
and it would just be like animal around the floor.
So there is that, just that, like,
even for a completely unenlightened mind, the sense of shame,
at least is something that would...
Now, obviously, you have the other extreme of, you know,
when people become religious and they start turning to this, like, moral commandments and repression,
but that's not any more that sense of shame.
Like, you know, when you're ashamed of everything,
even things that are not shameful.
But it's this kind of natural sense of shame,
in regard to, you know, like, nudity or body exposure
or, like, fluid-caused things in general.
So with that sense of shame, there is at least some kind of rules,
so to speak, in the world, on that natural level.
Because otherwise, yeah, everybody will just be going with everybody
and then you will be able to think...
Could be client, mentally client.
But we have, well, most people, as well as a human being,
they have an inherent sense of shame.
Yeah, exactly.
You feel when you're doing something wrong.
Yeah, that's exactly what it is.
And yet, we understand.
Yeah, if you're honest, if you're authentic and self honest,
that sense of shame, that's exactly what it becomes,
what reveals itself.
And I'm not talking about the fabricated,
like, oh, it's shameful, but it's really just kind of,
more like a hateful attitude that people turn into,
like, morally, judgmental and so on.
That's more just a kind of real will and repression.
No, if you're authentic, then exactly.
There are things that you don't necessarily want to do with others
or being, like, known.
Which means, then, because you're authentic, you wouldn't be doing it.
You're not going to try to conceal it either.
And in the same sense, the guilt for doing something wrong.
Yeah, then you realize, instead of denying it, ignoring it,
and say, oh, you don't hate yourself, and well, no,
you're accepting guilt as a result of what you've done carelessly.
And then, next time, it will make you think twice,
because you're not running away from the disagreeable feeling of the guilt.
You're accepting it, and sometimes you can endure for days,
and then come back again and again and again for years later.
Each time it comes, each time you accept it.
There is a...
It's thought-free.
It's good to be guilt-free.
No shit.
Well, that's true.
It's good to be guilt-free, and the only way to be guilt-free
is through full accepting guilt, and then going beyond it.
Not by ignoring it or denying it.
And that is exactly the case.
You feel that inherent sense of shame,
but they project it and blame society for it.
I mean, yes, society has a lot of blame, the degree of shaming,
but there is that threshold, which is the natural shame,
and some people, yeah, we have more of it, some people have less of it.
Certain things that will just make you uncomfortable.
But then people find that a problem, because, yeah,
it can be unpleasant, obviously, if it's preventing you from doing what you want to do,
and then, yeah, you do blame society, blame the culture,
you rebel against it, you go completely...
You try to override it.
But that's completely misplaced effort.
The better effort is actually no.
There is a place for that natural degree of sense of shame
in regard to doing things that are really...
Not...
Not nice.
Yeah, they are inappropriate.
Because of that, and the fear of wrongdoing,
that's why it's always bound together.
Oh, I don't want to do it. It's just a problem.
Like stealing, lying...
Stealing, lying cheating.
Yeah, yeah.
Just being basically acting like a...
Just following your desires in the same manner and animalhood,
without any reflection or...
You know, you see dogs, I mean, they get into...
They get you into a village,
and they know they're most likely going to be attacked
and maybe seriously injured by all the other packed dogs.
But they just...
They just saw either a female and lost perspective or food and lost perspective.
And you know how...
They know how it's going to end,
but they just have no reflection over it to consider it.
So they just go and eat, and while they eat,
then they get attacked, and that's it.
And then they...
They don't know the consequences.
Yeah, they don't know about this consequences.
They can't factor them in,
because the mind doesn't possess the same powers of reflection as human mind does.
And that's why they don't have the sense of shame.
That's why, you know, you have a puppy and a mother,
and it's all like, oh, that's my mother.
But once he passes it on age,
and he starts responding to female hormones and the less insecurity,
then he just starts seeing the mother as a female.
It's not any more seen as a mother,
for as long as the heat is going on and so on.
There's no sense of shame.
They don't perceive that.
But for most people, they do have that recognition,
and that sense of shame will be guarding,
going that way.
For most, it's not always people at difference
or people don't have any natural sense of shame.
And how do you develop the sense of shame?
Well, but become self-transparent.
And by keeping your desires in check,
then you realize that with or without the sense of shame,
you are the one responsible for saying yes to desires
and following them through.
Because it doesn't matter what thoughts your mind
might be presenting in forms of desire,
possibilities for things you want to do.
That doesn't matter.
What matters is you're accepting to do it or not,
and then following through and doing it.
Or not.
So that's self-honesty.
Self-honesty.
You don't blame the society.
You don't blame government.
You don't blame your genes.
Or that's how I was born.
Because even if all those things are in play,
you, in the present moment,
is always responsible.
I always respond to the society.
The reflection of that.
The consequences.
The reflection of the consequences.
Well, that can help, but not necessarily.
It's like saying, you know,
people try to give up some addiction.
They can reflect on consequences,
but when the addiction present,
they don't see consequences relevant
on the same level as what the addiction is.
But if you're self-honesty,
you realize you would be able to allow
whatever pressing desire arises.
You would be allowed to arise
and having now space to not give it in.
Or be kind of occupied.
But that takes that you have to start seeing benefit
even in that initially strength.
If you don't, then there is no,
there won't be enough.
Well, there won't be enough ground for any property.
Because without that restrained beforehand,
you won't be able to allow desire
to come close without you acting upon it.
As soon as that coming, you'll be acting upon it.
But the restrained will prevent it.
It doesn't mean it's going to make things,
well, it will make things nicer and easier
and more peaceful later on.
The mind grows out of it.
Well, it grows from it.
But until then, it's actually yet
it's going to reveal the pain on the lying pain
beneath the desire and the lack of restraint.
