So you were saying earlier in terms of sensuality, in terms of anger, which you said some
particularly when you just quote you guys, the only reason why one gives into sensuality
is because one doesn't want to spend anything. What I meant was that so universally, literally
to every human mind regardless of the culture, education, religion, practice, whether they
heard about Buddhism or not, it doesn't matter, it doesn't matter. When a desire arises in
regard to anything, obtainable to the senses, when that desire arises, that desire is oppressing
that person. Desire is that sort of lack, pressure, a need, thirst, hunger, whatever. Means it makes
you act, it pressures you, I mean you don't have to act, that's the whole point. As a human being
you have a choice, but when desire arises the automatic responses to give into that pressure of
the desire. And why would you be giving into the pressure of any desire? It's because it's
unpleasant. If the pressure of the desire is neutral or pleasant, you wouldn't then spend all the
efforts and time gaining what your desire wants because you already be a reason. But that desire,
it's already unpleasant. So in order for you to deal with that displeasure, you just give in to
whatever the desire promises. So that's what I mean by engaging in sensuality you do so to be free
from the central pressure of the desire. So when people say no, I enjoy my senses, that's
that's a mistake that they themselves believe it. If they were to stop and think about and see
when there is a non-satisfied or unsatisfied desire, is that pleasant? Is that what you want? It
isn't. You enjoy sensuality for as long as you think and hold a view that you can access things
that your senses want to, but sooner or later time will come when you won't be able to fulfill
your desires. And then again, you don't just think, oh these particular desires I can't fulfill.
I mean some people might think that, but the point is to see then the nature of the desire in
the first place. Even the ones you can fulfill, so to speak, as in give in to their pressure and
seek the object of their desire until you feel fed up with it and then you feel like my desire disappears.
So in other words, you can never fulfill the desire. The point of desire is to stay a desire.
Based on non-satisfaction. Exactly. It requires a non-satisfaction for it to be. So that's
why if you stop and think about it, you realize the only reason you are engaged with sensuality.
People would be engaged with sensuality is because the pressure of the desire is unpleasant
and they don't know any other escape. And that's the whole point. And that's the same. Like then
whenever you encounter any other form of displeasure, your only way of dealing it is sensuality,
which is how people turn to food, music, sexual intercourse or whatever else. When they're sort of
feeling down or depressed or something's bothering them, they just commit harder. Because that's
the only form that they can resemble a relief of relieving oneself of that pressure. But actually,
you're just making it worse because the more you're dependent on running away from the desire,
the more pressure that desire will exercise over you.
So what should you do? Well, first, I mean, you don't have to do anything in a way,
but then you just remain. If you start seeing that, if you start seeing your own sensual,
your own desires and something that's controlling you, that you are enslaved by,
then you have to start seeing in the nature of before you give into the desire,
how it feels to just have the desire. And then it becomes like obviously clear as a day that
it's very unpleasant. Like even sometimes when you can't satisfy your desires, but maybe not
quickly enough, that's unpleasant. Either way, that discrepancy of desire is rooted in a
disagreeable feeling, that pressure is very unpleasant. So if you want a free yourself from it,
you have to first start restraining and making it worse through giving in to that pressure of desire.
It's like, oh, you're training yourself to be stronger than something else,
but in order to start doing that, you need to start resisting that thing you're trying to be
strong in regard to. So if you just habitually are giving into the desire and at the same time expect
to be somehow be magically free from the pressure of the desire, but that's just a contradiction in terms.
So the restraint needs to come first. For the one who wants to be free from desire,
restraint needs to come first. Then the obvious, painful nature of the desire in itself becomes a parent.
And I said that before, maybe another audio talk, and that's that's like initially when people
start restraining that pain that arises from the desire. They would think it's because of my
restraint, but it isn't. Restraint cannot cause you pain. It can only reveal the underlying pain
of the desire and not getting what the desire wants. And the similarly of the five animals,
like pulling you in every, that the Buddha gave in like eye, nose, ear, mouth, and the body.
And as such, they're pulling you in their own domains to feed in their own respective
feeding grounds. Every animal wants to go and eat as much as it likes. So eyes just want to go
and look at the pleasurable sights and avoid this pleasure and it's single for every sense.
So you can imagine that your experience as a whole, your existence is basically you're
tied to these five animals you're inseparable from and they're always overpowering you and you're
you're enabling them enabling them even further when you're carelessly just giving into whatever
desire your eye wants to have or your ears or your sense of touch. So you can imagine if you
tie to five powerful animals and they start running towards their respective goals, objects of their
desire, you just run with it to avoid that terribly painful pull. You will experience if you start
if you try standing your ground but the animals are stronger than you, they will yank you and
it will be very unpleasant. But that doesn't mean that pain is not there if you run with them
because that enables them to pull you even harder. So initially you have to accept that sharp
pain of restraint which eventually you can see that it's actually it's not the restraint. Restrain
just shows me what happens when these animals yank in their respective domains and I don't give in
because if the animals wouldn't be yanking they wouldn't be any pain revealed by the restraint.
Imagine the animals are tamed and calm and they just walk slowly and you can just remain seated
and not have to run with them so they don't rip your arm off. But initially people get confused
and then this might start doing the restraint but then all the pain that arises as a result of
being yanked by these five senses they think it's because they're saying no they think it's because
of the restraint and then eventually they give back in. But it's not that pain is the nature of
being pressured by the senses by the sense desire. It's just when you run along with it you kind of
minimize the pulse so you pretend it's not there but the fact is all you have to do is say you
know to the desire and you'll see whether it's still there or not that pain. Unless you come really
free of course. So that's something everybody could benefit from just learning how to say no to
themselves gradually more in regard to this in regard to unnecessary things in regard to unnecessary
luxuries in regard to unnecessary indulgences because you are each time you give in carelessly
like that the animals get more to feed on which means they get more powerful which means each time
they pull you you'll be less and less able to resist those desires and very often and I'm
pretty sure many people can can relate to that out of their experience. Your own desire
takes you to the places you don't want to be. You know you like you'll know you regret it even
before him yet you can't help it and you're just drying there and let alone when the old age
sets in or sickness when your senses start to fail yet your mind is fully dependent on that
pleasure that you get from that remote satisfaction of your desires then the only source I said
before the only kind of remotely resemblance way of relief from any disagreeable feelings is
taken away now because senses can't enjoy anymore then you know eyes can't can barely see it's painful
to listen it's it's hard to chew body doesn't listen it's not young doesn't have that much energy
yet your mind was dependent on that constant run and now that's just taken away so when the
unpleasant feelings arise and they will inevitably now you have even less ground to deal with it
it's like a solid to find it. That's why people are terrified of solid
