So how can you go back as well, not being, not distracting yourself all the time in a way that
it says there and the Buddha says he doesn't intend on waiting for this.
So you're not holding on to your wakefulness, you're basically intent on not losing it and how you lose it, you lose it by giving into a non-wakeful intention.
So you cannot accidentally lose your wakefulness.
So even lapsing in terms of your thoughts or similar, it's not necessarily you lost wakefulness.
You lose wakefulness when you intentionally give into distraction or lust or anger and aversion.
So that's why in relation to the previous, well one of the previous talks was to keep questioning yourself, your motivation so that your own intentions can become transparent and clear.
Because you will know even if sometimes people say I'm engaged with spreading the dhamma but they're doing it, their intentions are rooted in the desire for distraction.
Desire for saying something to do, giving this worldly purpose to my life because otherwise just boredom and anxiety sets in and it's too much to handle.
And in that case that's not the dhamma.
Although you might be actually parroting the Buddha's words and publishing the Buddha's words, it's not the actual dhamma which is always non aversion, non greed, non aversion, non delusion, non distraction, wakefulness and knowledge.
They're only thinking and not being able to just relax.
They start discerning your intentions and then just you don't have to, and that's the problem when people don't discerning intentions, they tend to either indulge them all or dismiss them all because they don't see anything in between.
If a person starts discerning their own motivation, their own intentions, then you know actually these intentions are not rooted in greed, nor aversion of delusion.
No problem, that's how you get relaxed. So only you have to abandon those that are rooted in desire for distraction, desire for centrality, desire for aversion and so on.
That's why when you're coming from just relaxing into greed or what you say, relaxing into delusion, that's all you know.
I don't know this other way of relaxing.
Initially the only notion of relaxation is relaxation of distraction that you have, but that's yeah, that type of relaxation needs to be abandoned because it's not relaxation really.
Or you can call it relaxation but it's not peace because you fully control by it and fully dependent upon it.
Like watching a movie. Sure says, come all the sounds, sites, last one, bend, bend.
And basically you're out through your senses, you might not necessarily be actively pursuing the full-on central pleasures, but it's still bound with site sounds, melt taste touches, which means it's still within the central domain.
That's why it's not just you have to abandon the obvious course centrality, you also have to abandon distraction that you've been gaining through your senses.
But when I say abandoned, doesn't mean you obliterate any notion of your senses and deny it.
I just mean make sure that if you are engaging, that motivation, the intentions behind that engagement is not rooted.
In greed, aversion delusion, which is basically delusion equals wanting distraction.
Non-waitfulness.
That's it, all of those would contribute to non-waitfulness.
So that's it. And then automatically, if it's not those, then it's automatically wakefulness.
That's why you're not doing the wakefulness.
You're developing it basically by preventing non-waitfulness to overwhelm you.
Like intention or it to give into it. So you prevent that and then you're automatically wakefulness.
You're in becomes effortless.
Exactly, because you're not doing it. It's not a method or something to uphold constantly every second of your life.
That's how you get truly relaxed, truly peaceful, because it's effortless.
It takes effort to give in to intentions, to do things upon them, be central or non-central.
But if you, all you do is just abstain from the effort of engaging with centrality, aversion, distraction,
then your experience is automatically effortless and wakeful.
And then within that, well, you'll know exactly what to do if you get to that point.
