What is a real blessing?
What is the real blessing?
Sometimes people ask monks for blessings, but what is the real blessing?
Well, I guess you can define it a blessing is something that's going to be beneficial for
your well-being in the future.
That's just off the top of my head to define blessing.
So if you take that as a criteria, then you can see that actually fundamentally you are
the only one who is responsible for your own blessings.
You can't have somebody bless you.
Well, you can have somebody bless you if somebody comes and tells you what to do, properly
accurately in terms of the mind development, in terms of the virtuous life and that kind
of inner growth.
Yeah, that person is sort of giving you blessings.
I.e. he's basically giving you opportunity to bless yourself.
But most often people just resort to blessings as a form of superstition, which is the
sole point of it is to cover up the existential anxiety, fear of basically life, because you
recognize that you're not in your life, you're bound with the life, you're bound with your
attachments, with your wants, with your desires, with everything.
But deep down you know you're not in control of it, and any second it can be taken away.
So that recognition is dreadful.
So a person without any wisdom, without an instruction of guidance would basically have
to turn towards distracting himself from it.
But sooner or later it starts to catch up and that's when people become religious, superstitious,
engaging all sorts of rituals and blessings and needs, just to to mark, to cover up to
like, no, I will be fine.
Because you recognize that fact that you're not in control right here and now and that
your future is uncertain, because you might not live next moment.
But blessings being pertaining to your well-being in the future, you feel blessed now, you sort
of smooth over the anxieties of the future.
So you basically bring you some sort of peace, but it's not a, it's not a, it's not actually
peace that kind of fixes the problem, it's the peace that comes from ignoring the problem,
which is not really the peace.
So being virtuous yourself being virtuous yourself, may keeping the acts of virtue, upholding
the virtue, upholding the non-ill will, non-sensuality, non-hatred, non-slender, wrong speech, inciting
violence, anything basically and wholesome, non-indulgence, you can, you can be rest sort of
assured that that is, that is a relatively universally accepted, blessful behavior, so to speak.
It will, it will result in your, in the future well-being.
And that's what it's meant when, you know, like, with the five precepts we spoke before,
they would say, like, the Buddha would say, it would, it would provide you with confidence
and you have nothing to fear, because you know, with these criteria that I'm upholding
strictly for virtues, behavior, non-ill will, non-indulgence and so on, you start recognizing
it good as they are, and then you see, yeah, this will most certainly be good for me even
in the future, so you have confidence upon it, so then you don't have anxiety, right?
Because why?
Because you're not, not misbehaving.
You have no, you're not giving in to anything unwholesome, so you, you feel protected with
your own actions, and you can't ask for higher blessing than that, if the blessings
would truly depend upon somebody else, which means you would always be the mercy of someone
else as well, which would bring you back to the nature of your anxiety as it is right
now, or you're not in control of you, or the mercy of elements, circumstances, accidents
and what not, you're in mercy as something else.
So if you want real blessing, is the blessing that you can make a difference, you can sort
of have an input in, and that's the blessing that I'm talking about, of a virtuous behavior.
And there is no nobody in between there, so nobody can take your credit away, nor can
you blame anybody else if you don't do it, it's on you.
No, you can take your blessing away.
Exactly, exactly.
