Is love the path to happiness?
Is love the path to happiness?
Love in your family, love in your dogs, love in you.
So just nature, a nature of love in general?
Yes, does that mean happiness?
Right.
The end of the day.
Well, the short answer is absolutely not.
This is the common phenomenon of love.
It's inseparable from attachment.
But if you're not attached to something, you're not loving it.
So the whole notion of the unconditional love,
well, it's a contradiction in terms.
You're either unconditionally bound with it,
or you're emotionally divorced from it, which means you don't love it,
which means you're not attached to it.
Because in itself, love is a bond.
Even you can make it as abstract and divine as you want.
It's still a bond, because it still has its object,
which means there is still some sort of attachment to a degree.
But actually, like, that's as people's fantasies are very often,
and they talk about their unconditional love.
Like an ideal, an abstract ideal that in practice, love is even worse.
It's always, in fact, it's always mixed with infatuation,
with lust, with delight, with conceit, with pride,
with everything else.
That's basically what love is.
Passion.
Passion, of course, inseparable from passion.
It's where you can kill at the same time.
Full follow.
You can kill forever.
Well, I'm sure the people will try to justify the love they would think that.
So trying to be unconditional love for everything.
Yeah, that is just an ideal, basically, that's a contradiction in terms.
Because if you're, well, love, be it even unconditional, is a relationship.
Means you are, you are relating yourself to these things,
which means to that extent you're bound by them.
So it's impossible to have unconditional love.
If it's unconditional, means there is no condition.
There is no relationship.
But love is a relationship.
So it's basically saying, like, oh, the unconditional conditioning.
Well, the unconditionally conditioned, that's what unconditional love would be.
Or have a relationship with no relationship.
That's just, that's a contradiction in terms.
So you can find that poetic value in saying contradictory terms.
But in itself, in practice and phenomenologically speaking,
makes absolutely no sense.
So you're either bound or you're free from the bond.
So it's love, virtuous.
Is it a virtue?
Well, it depends, but no, no.
I mean, love can be wholesome.
That's one sort of slow and answering.
Love can be wholesome in a sense of, it's not necessarily, you know,
infatuated passion and lust and greed involved with it.
But as a bond, as something that is fundamentally still rooted
in a degree of passion and emotion, it is unwholesome.
From the point of view of enlightenment, it is unwholesome.
It's an obstacle, basically.
It's a bond that you need to break.
Love or hate, basically, if you want to be free from suffering
or if you want to develop your mind to the...
Well, it's full potential, so to speak.
It's full potential freedom, both must be abandoned equally.
Both love and hate.
So love cannot bring happiness.
It can bring world happiness, which from the ultimate point of view
is not happiness, obviously.
