So, a simple question, why is pain a problem, because I don't want it, I don't want it.
So which is first, you don't want it, that's it's a problem, or it's a problem that's
you don't want it? What is first, Mark? Yeah, sure, pain is not wanted, pain is a problem.
Why is a pain a problem that's unwanted? Because I don't want it. So, you make it a
problem, because you don't want it. So, if you stop resisting pain, as in stop trying
to get rid of the pain, pain ceases to be a problem.
Well, it depends what you mean by that, whether you mean too much of painfulness of the pain,
in which case, well as long as you're still alive, it's not too much. Or you mean this
is too much of a problem for me, so I don't want it. So, if you don't have a problem
with pain, then there cannot be too much of a pain. And that's why we're going to get
that example of highway robbers sawing your limbs one by one. And if the mind has ill
willed towards them, it means it hasn't fulfilled the teaching. Because by fulfilling the dama,
it's inconceivable to have ill will towards pain, or those who cause it. It is just inconceivable
because it was not conceivable to begin with, but it was your ignorance of it, it was conceiving
it. But again, back to the same simple question, which is a reflection anybody can do. Why
is painful feeling a problem? Because I prefer pleasure. Yeah, so why would I prefer pleasure?
It's not pain. Which is why, why is it better then? You realize you won't find an objective
answer to it. You have an attitude of no wanting pain, and you have an attitude of wanting pleasure,
and your whole life is dictated by that. But if you look at an attitude as to why is that
attitude there, you won't find an answer. It's good to do attitude. And that's the only
thing, the only one and only reason for human suffering of any kind. That's what it meant
by craving means suffering. I want this, I don't want this. But even if even if a person
just starts reflecting, don't jump into answering right away. So just why is pain any pain physical
emotion or any pain? Any disagreeable feeling that I'm experiencing, why is it not wanted
by default? Why is that my default attitude? And by putting yourself in such a question,
without providing a rational answer, you're becoming aware of that problem, the problem
of your attitude. And sometimes yes, sometimes maybe you have to keep that question for days
as a way of contemplation. No, you have to keep repeating it. Just don't answer it. Keep
asking yourself, but look for an answer, but don't answer it. So you're looking, but you
are not allowing yourself to formulate it in the irrational, psychologicalism manner.
Because you really want to become aware of that emotional level of your resistance to
the unpleasant emotion. Yeah, you can give this answer to that answer, but emotionally,
you'll still be resisting it, or you would still want to prolong it if it's pleasure.
But there is absolutely no justifiable reason for not wanting pain. Because if your attitude
towards your feelings matters, you would feel only what you want to feel. In other words,
feelings would be obeying the attitude. But the fact that you're experiencing pain, which
is not wanted, means you have absolutely no say in the domain of feeling. The domain
of feeling is unaware of your resistance. Feeling, feelings feel, pleasant feeling feels
pleasure, unpleasant feeling feels unpleasant pleasure, this pleasure. Neutral feeling feels
neither. That's it. You don't exist for it. Your attitude is a self-assumed parasite
upon it, because of which you suffer. Like the experience of pain does not experience
the dukkha. The experience of pain, you're resisting it, you experience the dukkha. That's
where you get to be free from suffering, and your sense of self, and the gratitude is assumption
and everything else. But then pleasure, displeasure, and neutral remains. Because they have never
a problem. Pain is inevitable. Well, exactly. Inasmuch as any feeling is inevitable for
as long as you're alive. Either pleasure, displeasure, or neither pleasure nor displeasure.
But the attitude is... Get you this. Yeah? Option. Well, it's not optional. It's either
you have attitude or you have undone the attitude. It's not option. Maybe the type of attitude,
but even the type of attitude is not optional. Because in pleasure, you will always be wanting
more pleasure in pain. You will always want to try and get rid of it. In a neutral feeling,
you're always going to distract yourself from it. So your attitude is determined by the craving.
Pouring has set outcomes. What's optional is how you're going to go about it. But that's
already far down the line. It's not fundamental. Fundamental is the attitude of wanting, no one.
Fundamental is the attitude. Fundamental is craving. Craving for what? Well, craving for
pleasure in what pleasure? Cream for more pleasure in pleasure. Craving for absence of pain in
pain. Craving for distraction or pleasure in neither pleasure nor unpleasant feeling. But
that attitude can become apparent if you start questioning yourself in regard to the presently
enduring feeling. What am I feeling now? Whether something happened to you, somebody said something
you're upset. Pain. Why do I need to... Well, first, you have to stop projecting the blame,
so to speak, and responsibility onto the world for your pain. Because as long as you still think
that I'm suffering because such and such person said this and this, you have a lot of work to
do, basically, as in you have many views to undo. When you take responsibility for how you're
feeling and stop blaming the world, then you might be able to start discerning your attitude
in regard to your own feeling as a primary and only one and only source of your suffering.
But obviously a person who is fully projected onto the world being the reason for my pain,
they can never see that because they haven't taken responsibility for it.
But say you've taken responsibility for you being affected by your feelings,
so you stop trying to talk things out with somebody upset you. If that's sort of done to
maintain social norms, that's fine. But you don't do it as a means of escape from your feeling.
You recognize that responsibility for you being affected by what's being felt is when you.
Not from the circumstances, not from the elements, not from other people, not of who said what,
not of all the disrespect me enough or they didn't do this or they didn't do that, no.
All of that is you took for granted the attitude of trying to get rid of this unpleasureable feeling
and then where you look, where would you go about it? He said this, it's his fault.
This happened, I didn't have enough luck, it's everyone else's fault.
Even if people are genuinely rude and need to you, if you suffer and encounter it, that's on you.
That's what it would have said, the wise mind, the one with the well wisdom and the right view,
would endure harsh words, slander and all this, in the same sense you would endure elements,
in the same sense you would endure heat called hunger,
insect bites, slanderous and abusive words, because it's on the same level, it's just element.
But you being upset and account of it, that's on you.
So why is pain a problem?
In order to reveal the attitude, your attitude that makes it a problem, that feeds the attitude,
that makes it a problem, that feeds the attitude, vicious circle, in order to reveal it,
you have to stop blaming pain for the problem, for the problem.
So why is pain a problem? You realize, no, why do I have a problem with pain?
That's a more accurate question, because pain in itself isn't the problem,
but there is a problem in regard to the pain. Why is that? Because the pain is not wanted.
Why? Why is the pain not wanted? Okay, I wanted it. Why would you want it?
Why do you have to either want or not want? Why can you just be
equanimous in regard to either? Okay, I don't want pain, but I do not want pain to either.
Any pain, big or small, far and near, past, future, any attitude in regard to any pain.
So if you stop trying to get rid of it, then the attitude towards pleasure becomes also apparent.
Stop trying to entertain it, stop trying to make it so longer, stop trying to get more of it.
So automatically, by discerning the nature of your attitude of its pain,
you also start discerning the nature of your attitude towards pleasure, the gratuitous assumption
of sensuality, sensual desire and pleasure you get from it. That doesn't mean you stop perceiving
agreeable and disagreeable things, but that's one thing, another thing is craving for more of it
and craving for their absence and craving for your distraction. So if a nature of pain ceases to
be a problem for a person, there's nothing else to do because it doesn't matter where it comes from,
from what sense, from what thought, from what experience, from what circumstance. Pain is not
resisted, pain is not feared, pain is not wanted either, because sometimes people would go the
other way and overly indulge pain as a mean of showing that you know. No, if pain is a reason,
it doesn't matter, that's not a problem, it's a secondary thing. So if pain arises on the kind of
your restraint and determination and willpower, you have no problem with it.
If pain arises on the kind of somebody abusing you or fending you whatever,
you have no problem with it either. But you don't allow yourself to be abused.
Well, you allow yourself to be abused when you give in to the attitude of its pain,
you become abused. That's the whole point. Because a lot of people think that.
Like yeah, the circumstances are abusive, but you are not abused until you put the projection
on the circumstances for that abuse. If you realize that abuse, that abuse is founded
upon your attitude towards the experienced feeling in the time. So if that attitude is
attitude of, I don't want this, you made yourself affected by that abuse.
So I'm a sort of sexual abuse and sexual. Well, how can you be sexually abused? The body can be
sexually abused, physically abused. But that's the kind of normal sexual relationship with people.
Exactly, yeah. Which means that people go through this, they take the ownership of the body to be
theirs. But we all know how that ends. Sickness, aging, and death. Which means it was a mistake to
take it as yours. And you better undo that mistake while you're alive. And you reflect, if this body
were truly mine. In the same sense, what I said, if the feelings were truly yours, your attitude
would be the first and your feelings would be determined by it. Not your attitude would be
determined by the corresponding feeling that has arisen. Means, oh, so my attitude is secondary to
this, yet it's acting like it's some sort of commander in chief. So me resisting pain
is my attitude towards the reason pain, which has arisen on its own. So if I were to develop the
attitude of, hold on, that's not a problem. And I stopped gratuitous to resisting it,
you wouldn't be able to suffer. In the same sense, the body gets somebody attached to beat you up
physically. That's one thing. But you, through gratuitous assumption of the ownership of that body,
that's how you become beaten up and abused. Doesn't matter what type of
assault and abuse it is, the point is it can be done only to the body,
only to the, literally to this bag of, bag of skin filled with lots of other organs and things.
And you thinking that you have a say, ultimate say in what befalls that body, well, that was
your ignorance from the start. So even if you never get physically abused, you will be abused,
your body will be abused by aging, sickness and death. That's the ultimate abuse. No matter
physical abuse, if it doesn't kill you, can amount for the abuse of death. That is inevitable for
everyone. But if you realize that the attitude of abuse comes from you accepting the ownership
of the body that has been abused, and you accept it through wanting pleasure, through it, and you
accept it through wanting to get rid of the pain through it. So it comes down again to the
to the feelings that are present. It's unpleasant feeling of abuse.
And you don't even think twice before you start blaming the feeling what happened to the body
and everything else. But if you had enough mindfulness and self-reflection, you realized that,
yeah, it's unfortunate, but that's the subject of elements.
A form is being deformed by elements, by other bodies, other things. That's just nature of life,
by sickness, aging, death, whatever, accidents, that's the nature of it.
And it was actually my mistake to assume that I had the say in that domain to gratuitously
entertain the attitude of saying no to this, or saying yes, I want more of this, whereby I have
no say in the rising of those things. How can I have a say in prolonging it or not arising in the
first place? How can you have a say in not wanting a rising of pain when any attitude towards pain
requires pain first? That's why it's unpleasant. That's why you suffer because of the discrepancy,
not because of the pain. Suffering is the discrepancy that your attitude creates in regard to the
present feeling. So if the feeling is pleasurable, you suffer when you want more of it. And the
discrepancy there is pleasant feeling and wanting more of it, as in not enough of it. But if you
were to stop wanting more of it, then you're only going to have a pleasant feeling. So there's no
discrepancy, no suffering. Consequently, you have the unpleasant feeling present, pain is present,
and you don't want that presence at all, which means you're overdoing it now. There is some pain,
but your attitude does not want any of it. And that's another discrepancy you created it.
Because there is pain. Because there is pain, exactly. If all you had is your attitude towards pain,
you would be in control. But no, there is the actual pain there. And it's your attitude that
contradicts it. No, this pain must not be while the pain is. Oh, this pleasure must be greater,
while it isn't. There's a neutral feeling. This neutral feeling, what neutral feeling?
But there is a neutral feeling, but you're not seeing any neutral feeling. That's an
discrepancy. That's why when you're bored, you feel unpleasant. When you're bored,
basically, you feel neither pleasure nor pleasure, but that in itself, it's unpleasant for you.
You want to feel something because a threshold of your discernment of feeling is pain and pleasure.
You don't even see the neutral one. And that's why it's unpleasant. So it's a slightly subtle
discrepancy, but nevertheless, it's a discrepancy. Probably you know it's presence. You know neutral.
Then you stop contradicting it. No contradiction, no discrepancy, no discrepancy, no suffering.
Suffering is a discrepancy created when your attitude clashes with the world, basically.
A world can present itself only in three forms, agreeable, disagreeable, and neutral.
And if you deal on that level, you don't have to worry about anything else more particular than that.
So how to deal with it in that level? If you take responsibility for what I was being felt,
as in, this is felt by me because of my attitude towards it,
I'm making the feeling affect me, feeling of pleasure, feeling of pain,
neutral feeling. So if somebody says something upsetting and the pain arises, that pain
is not in what's being said. It's not in that person. It's not in any of the circumstances.
It's in your attitude in regard to the circumstances.
So you have to take responsibility for suffering, basically. You don't have to take responsibility
for agreeable and disagreeable, but you have to take responsibility for wanting agreeable
and not wanting disagreeable. What do you mean by taking responsibility?
It means seeing that it's on you. There is no excuse. It's my doing. I'm responsible for this.
So when I suffer, I'm responsible for that. Only through that attitude, you can actually
get a glimpse at least and maybe even go through with it. You can figure out how to not suffer.
But for as long as your attitude doesn't take on suffering
as your responsibility and conflates suffering with disagreeable circumstances,
with painful circumstances, you're not going to see the nature of suffering, how can you free yourself
from it. So you have to stop blaming painful circumstances for your suffering. Suffering is
not pain. So there is pain without suffering, but they cannot be suffering without pain.
So if you remove your attitude of denial and try to get rid of the pain,
you won't suffer. If you remove your attitude and indulgent in regard to the pleasure, you won't
suffer. You won't suffer on account of either pleasure or pain or neutrophil.
Well, this attitude is maintained through non-knowing it, through gratuitously,
assuming it at face value. And I've heard that. Exactly. Well, that's all you can do. You can't
decide to stop. Okay, now I will stop trying to get rid of the feeling of unpleasure. That's
impossible. But understanding your attitude towards it, that attitude is being gradually
cancelled out. I feel pain. I feel pain. Mind jumps to blame the circumstances. You recognize that.
Wait a minute. How many times has this happened? How many times will it happen? Do I have a say
in circumstances? No. Why do I then keep sort of like inflaming myself with this attitude of
yeah, this or this or that person? Well, it's just, it just fits the five further. While I kind of
know already that that's not the problem. That's really like indignation and anger and
the constant maintenance, the constant action to make it valid. Constant blame. Find the scapegoat
for this. Cheers for it. Is that false? Who's going to pay for this? Yeah, there are mistakes
and people do things that run wise and they're responsible for that. But if you suffer on account
of it, that responsibility is solely yours. Everybody is sick. Sickness. That kind of pain.
The sickness is true. Yeah, you have to kind of, you know, sort yourself out there. Yeah, that's all
fine. You can be managing the circumstances. But you don't want to be doing it out of trying to
get rid of the suffering because that inquires you identifying suffering with disagreeable
circumstances of an alien body. And how do you know whether you're acting out of it or not?
Well, ask yourself, what if I don't take the medicine? What if I don't go and see the doctor?
Am I going to get filled with anxiety and fear in regard to this? Am I going to suffer?
Am I going to experience mental anguish, basically? If the answer is yes, means you are still
conflating suffering with circumstances. Well, you can't just give up the medicines.
No, no. Well, then you realize whether you give up the medicines or not. That's not the problem.
The problem is you confusing your suffering with disagreeable feeling. There has a reason on the
level of an alien body. But you are making it into your mental anguish because of the
gratuitous attitude of trying to get rid of it. So then you can take a step further and reflect.
Okay, so this is the work that needs to be done in order to do their work. I need to stay alive,
so I'll take the medicine. That's like properly reflecting. Then you take the medicine as like
a bottle in the time so that you cannot upload the problem. But you don't take the medicine out of
that blind sort of just jump into it. I'm sick, fear, deal with it. Okay, and then I'll practice.
You've got to look after your tools. Yeah, of course, of course, exactly.
The bodies are two on a kind of which you can understand the nature of the body,
the nature of not ownership and so on. And for that, you need it. Keep it in a suitable.
So that's what we'll say. He wisely avoids a wild elephant, the one who prays it down. He
wisely avoids a snake, a child called Pitt while a pack of dogs because he would be foolish
before he has completed the work to ignore the fact that this might kill him.
But you don't go around with an attitude of health is good in itself,
as in the health is the greatest value, where you're going to be solely disappointed.
So health is basically a tool. And then you realize, okay, my health's not perfect, but the
tool is still good enough. And you can also then realize that you're able to go quite far with
the attitude of it's good enough because it is good enough. And it comes down to what as long
as I'm still alive. And you know, my senses are still there. It's still good enough, even if you
are in pain and discomfort. You don't have to go and seek out intense feelings.
No, absolutely not. Of course not. It's going to change my attitude.
Why would you do that? Like if somebody has a thought, where would that action intention be
rooted? Fear of suffering. Right there and then. So you realize, I don't need to go out because
I just now reveal to myself that I'm trying to get rid of the suffering by thinking I'll go out
and do this and this. And that's where you get rid of the suffering, where you recognize your
attitude in regard to the disagreeable feeling, which is always, well, there's a feeling always
present. So yeah, so the work is always present. The work is always present in the sense of being
mindful of the attitude towards the present feeling. And in order to be mindful of the present feeling,
you have to stop blaming the circumstances for the arising of that feeling. You have to take
responsibility for it. You have to be you have to feel it basically. You have to allow it to be felt,
but I'm not trying to get rid of it. Mindful of the craving, the attitude.
Well, you can't be mindful of the craving, as I'm craving and craving and craving,
you can be mindful of the feeling and then discern the nature of it. Like, well, can I, as I said,
my attitude is always second to this. It's inconceivable to be different.
Once that which you have been prioritized, which you have been prioritizing is seen as second,
and it's not a priority anymore. And if that attitude is not a priority, that's how the attitude
starts to fade. So to be mindful of the enduring feeling, you get to discern the nature of the
feeling. That's why mindfulness is the basis of knowledge, or like pain of restraint, saying
no to yourself, saying no to sensual indulgence, saying no to laziness, saying no to your will,
acting out of will, it produces pain. Because there's that discrepancy of I want to do this,
but you say no. But again, where is that discrepancy really rooted? Is it rooted in you want this and
saying no to it? Or is it rooted in you want this saying no to this? That's experienced
disagreeably that you don't want. So circumstances arising, say like a prospect of ill will,
but you restrain yourself as a result of that, you're experiencing this pain now, unpleasant
feeling. That's what you're resisting. So circumstances were not a problem.
Even wanting to act out of it wasn't a problem. It became a problem when circumstances, they were
unpleasant. You wanted to get rid of the displeasure through affecting the circumstances. That's why
you go and shout, beat people up, threaten them. So they never ever say that to you again.
But if you were not affected by the feeling of what's being said, how could you even conceive
act of ill will? And same as we spoke in many other talks sensuality as well. The first
relationship with central prospect of every mind that's universal is pain.
That's why sensuality is so intoxicating because it's felt very unpleasantly.
And if you give into it, not just that you avoid that, well, that you cover up that pain,
but you get more pleasure out of it. So it feels like a double pleasure.
But you realize that sensuality is maintained and people go with say, you know,
I'll follow the tastes or sexuality or just just careless indulgence of the senses
because it's very painful when the prospect of central indulgence presents itself,
it's felt very painfully to not give in. And automatically you blame your attitude of
not giving in for the pain. But you realize, wait a minute, my attitude is a negative attitude.
Like I'm not doing anything. Negative attitude. Negative attitude means sensuality has a reason,
hey, go and eat all these cakes that you want now. That's a thought. So you're not actually
eating the cakes, which means you're still not doing anything. So your response is a negative
response. Not a bad response. Not a bad response in a negative like, oh, it's bad. No, it means
it's basically not a positive action. It's a call to a positive action. Go and get these cakes and
eat them and enjoy the sense of taste you get from it. Now, all of that is still your thought
and you're not eating it. You're not making any effort. So it's a negative experience. It's
absence of these cakes. They will provide me with these great pleasures. And that's the pain of it.
It's because of your attitude that always welcomes greater pleasure from the
currently experienced feeling. So then the prospect of greater pleasure immediately
is experienced as that great discrepancy. And then people would give in, go and get all these cakes
and overeat and whatnot, because they want to avoid the pain in the first place.
But can you really avoid as in, can you really prevent the pain in the first place by doing that?
Or can you just covering it up and distract yourself from it? And you realize you can't avoid it.
You realize it by giving in value to the joy that comes out of taste,
treating all these cakes in this example, you gave in the value, you confirmed that you were
affected by it in the first place by that pain of not having that centrality.
So as we said before, people think sensuality is unpleasant because they say no to it.
But it's out of the way around. Through saying no to sensuality, you realize that the pain
that you've been attributing to you saying no as in not giving in to the positive action.
The pain of it is basically in that positive action.
So if you want to get rid of sensuality and pain of sensuality and dependence and pressure
and burden and all of it, you just need to stick to saying no to it. And then the nature of it will
become apparent. Because you're not doing anything, you're not doing anything now.
And the thought of sensuality comes. But restraint is closer to the natural state you were before.
You were not doing anything. But it's the thought of sensuality that pressures you to go and do it.
And the pain arises on account of that. That's the discrepancy that's been created.
Because you want to do anything before sensuality and you're not doing anything
when you're restraining sensuality. So that's the constant there. What has changed is absence
of sensuality before the pain and then presence of sensuality when the pain is there.
So you realize wait a minute. It's the presence or absence of sensuality. Craving for that pleasure,
that's what creates the discrepancy of pain, of suffering on account of sensuality.
Not mighty strain. Mighty strain is more like emulation of the proper behavior,
of the proper action, of the action that doesn't give in to the pressure of sensuality or the
oriole burness on. That's why the restraint, self-composure virtue has to come first.
Because it starts emulating things rightly. You don't know it yet. But on that ground you can get to know it.
So inevitably pain is going to be felt when you send out to sensuality and you have to accept it.
Once you accept it, then you can say basically to the pain and to yourself that that pain belongs
to the sensuality, not to the restraint of it. Because as I said restraint, it's no action there.
It's abstaining from action. So you've been abstaining from sensuality when there
was no sensuality pressuring you. Now sensuality is pressuring you. You're practicing restraint.
Again, you're on the same level of abstaining from that action. Yet there is pain. What's different?
It's absence or presence of sensuality. And then it becomes even more apparent. The one thing for
sure, you'll never find peace and like ultimate freedom in the sense of not being pressured by
circumstances. If you keep engaging with sensuality, with gratuitous cravings of pleasure through
senses, with gratuitous expressions of your ill will through your senses. So whether sensuality
touches you, whether ill will touches you, whether boredom touches you, what they're having common
pain. It's a disagreeable experience. Having an attitude of wanting to get rid of disagreeable
means what? In sensuality, how do you get rid of disagreeable by saying yes to it?
In ill will, how do you get rid of the disagreeable by affecting the person or whatever circumstances
by saying yes to it? Exactly. In boredom, how do you get rid of disagreeable by saying yes to it
and finding things to distract yourself from it? Either way, you have a positive attitude
that result in positive actions of indulgence, ill will, distraction, greed, aversion, delusion,
not metaphysical things, they're things that your attitudes are based on, your actions are based on
because of your attitude in regard to how you're feeling.
So from that point of view, that's what I'm going to meant. Whatever it's felt counts as suffering
because feeling of agreeable pressures you, feeling of disagreeable pressures you,
feeling of mutual pressures you. But again, that pressure is not in the feeling or on the feeling,
that pressure is in your ignorance of it. So you are pressured in regard to pleasure
because you haven't understood it. You are pressured in regard to this pleasure because you haven't
understood it. Same goes for the neutral feeling. And that's exactly what I said. If the neutral
feeling is not understood, it's felt unpleasantly, pressure is there. If the neutral feeling is
understood, there is no pressure, it's felt pleasantly. So you want sensuality in order to be free from
pain. You have ill, will and anger in order to be free from pain. You have distraction, boredom,
indolence, laziness in order to be free from pain. Wanting to be free from pain?
If you stop equating that with trying to get rid of this pain,
then you can actually learn how to free yourself from pain, from being affected by pain.
So you will truly be free from pain, not when pain stops arising, but when your attitude
to both pain changes. So that's again just to also add to what you said, you don't have to go out
seeking out suffering and pain. Just say no to your desires and the pain is there. You don't
need to go and risk your life and feel threatened and get, you know, that existential dread going.
Just start saying no to your daily sense desires and you'll see how quickly the pain will come
knocking on your door. If the attitude is developed towards pain is not a problem, it's my attitude
towards pain that's a problem. Then no amount of pain can prevail over the mind. That's what
it will meant for an out of hunt. The disagreeable feelings cannot overwhelm his mind. He is the one
who overwhelms, his mind overwhelms the disagreeable feelings. Well, he is in one who overwhelms his
mind in regard to disagreeable feelings. And that's not just that he needs to do that. It's like
there's some sort of, you know, a determination sort of willpower practice. No, to understanding
that's just the natural state of affairs. When disagreeable arises, he has a reason overwhelmed
by the mind that has understood it. Basically understanding overwhelms the disagreeable.
Presence of understanding automatically is higher than disagreeable or agreeable or neutral.
So no, none of those feelings can overwhelm it anymore. Because it's not on the level of just
I'm doing this, it's on the level of this thing, this pain that's there, there is the understanding
of that pain that's there simultaneously with that pain. Understanding. You understand what's there?
So that understanding depends on what's there. But whenever that thing is there, it has been
understood right there and then because it's there. No, because you theorize about it and
rationalize about it. No, it's because it's there. That's what's been understood. Presence of that
thing, presence of agreeable feeling, presence of disagreeable feeling. And there's just another
way of saying there is no more attitude. There is no more assumed, almost entitled, attitude
in regard to pleasure, pain, or neutral. So then pleasure feels pleasantly,
displeasure feels unpleasantly, and neutral feelings need feels neutrally, and there is no
suffering in regard to any.
So we started by saying, why is pain a problem? But why am I making a problem out of pain?
Same. Why am I making a problem out of pleasure? Well, I'm not making a problem where you are
because you are pressured by it. If pleasure is truly not a problem, you wouldn't suffer on a
kind of knot getting enough of it. Whichever shape or form pleasure would arise,
it would be self-sufficient to that extent. It means there would be no craving for more
essential pleasure. So you have a thought of, as we said, of going and eating up all the nice
sweet cakes. That thought is agreeable. It's nice, nice cakes, nice, nice taste.
But that's it. In itself, that's efficient. Why would not that thought pressure you to go and
make all these actions of finding cake, getting cake, eating cake, consuming cake, all of that?
That means you were affected by that pleasure on the level of your thought.
Because you were affected, the only means of you dealing with being pressured and experiencing
disagreeable is seeking out what it sort of points at, at the cake, at the mouth and eating,
shoving cake in your mouth, all that. But all that secondary to the thought of that pleasure of the
taste. But if you were indifferent to the pleasure of the taste on the level of the thought,
committing actions on account of it becomes inconceivable. There doesn't mean that you don't
recognize this is a tasty cake and this is not a tasty food. But none of that experience can then
almost like facilitate further actions for its own sake. That's why central craving and central
pleasure always remains bound with the level of the thought. Because the only reason you'll be
going there and doing this and eating it because the context of the thought of consuming a tasty
food is still there, giving the meaning to all of your individual actions of getting there.
That's why once you go and eat the cake, you never can fulfill that thought. Because thought
is a thought and taste is a taste. It's a completely different sense. But you were assuming this
identity of the whole projection, the whole action. Thoughts of a pleasant taste, consumption of the
pleasant taste, it's identified. But deep down, it isn't and you know that. And that's obvious
to everyone. Everybody will say, people who never read Buddhism, yeah, you know, can't really satisfy
your desires, can't you? Because there's nothing to satisfy. There was a pleasure, initial pleasure
on the level of the thought. That's it. But it's your attitude that automatically wants more pleasure
so you think more about it. That wants more pleasure so you go and do something about it.
So again, it's attitude of wanting more pleasure in regard to the thought of pleasure. That's the
discrepancy that's been created there. So that attitude is why you suffer. That attitude is why
you assume the whole world of sensuality. But if you undo the attitude of automatically wanting
pleasure and automatically not wanting pain, then you have an agreeable thought of
some nice, very tasty food or agreeable thought of some beautiful music or agreeable thought
of beautiful sights. That's it. They're just beautiful things that you thought about.
And that agreeability of them stays with them. There is no attitude of you, I want more of this.
And that's why in the thought, they will be only the thought. In the sight, they will be only the
sight. In the sound, you hear something pleasant. That pleasure is confined to that pleasure.
Because you don't interfere with it through your attitude of wanting more of it. You don't interfere
with it through your attitude of trying to get rid of it. So in the scene, they've just been
the scene in the herd. They've just been heard the bakhi sutta, the famous bahai sutta.
Now because you got so absorbed in the scene that there's only the scene,
no, it's because in the scene, there can only be the scene. You can't have the something else in
the scene. No, if it's there, it's seen. You can't have the herd in the scene or the thought in the scene.
In as much you can't have the scene in the thought. And that's what I'm saying here. That's
why sensuality is on the level of the mind. And that's what I said for even for the Tagata,
the beautiful things remain in the world. But it's the desire and lust his thought and desire
and lust that's been perpetuated through it. That's what he has uprooted.
So a thought of central pleasure is agreeable on the level of the thought.
And you recognize that is the extent of his gratification, that initial
agreeability. That's as much as you can get from him. So if you remove the attitude of
its wanting more of it, you remove any basis for spreading of sensuality.
If there is no spreading of sensuality, sensuality will cease because it requires maintenance.
A vision requires maintenance. Ignorance requires maintenance.
Your will, if there is a thought of, I've been offended, he said something rude to me,
or all these people might come and kill me. If you're not trying to get rid of the displeasure
of that thought, you won't be affected by anything that happens through that thought.
And you certainly won't be able to engage with anything and wholesome.
That's why you wouldn't be able to kill somebody even in self-defense.
You just wouldn't. There's nothing to defend.
So why is pain not wanted and why is pleasure wanted?
So it's not about getting rid of the pleasure or having more of it. It's not about getting rid
of the pain making it never appear. It's about not wanting one and not trying to get rid of the
other. That's it.
Now you can't say, you have a thought, as we said, or eating some tasty food.
And then you're full on chugging food down, down, down your throat, just swallowing it
and saying to yourself, but see, I don't want it on the level of my thought.
That's inconceivable. That's a contradiction in terms.
That's why we said it's impossible to engage physically with sensuality without having
central perceptions on the level of thought. You just can't.
Hence the sensory strain, the physical restraint needs to come first.
Because it's based on the wrong discrepancy. So to engage in with it, you're affirming the
discrepancy. If you're affirming the discrepancy, you're affirming suffering. How can you get rid
of suffering when you're affirming it through your own very actions?
You're building up on suffering. You take suffering as your temptation.
Yeah, exactly.
Which means any of your efforts can all really pretend to suffering, to undoing of it,
but trying to cover it up.
Trying to get rid of it. But trying to get rid of it is perpetuation of the attitude that
creates the problem. That's where meant your attitude creates the problem and problem perpetuates
once created. But there is no first point where that problem wasn't created and wasn't before.
There's no first point to a vision.
Or you can just think about pain as we started. Because if you remove the attitude of not wanting
pain, you're automatically dealing with sensuality, with pleasure, and with pain, and with your will.
Because you would give in to sensuality because it's unpleasant to not do so.
So the way of getting rid of that displeasure is by doing so. But what if you're not affected by
that displeasure in the first place? Can you realize, oh, there's nothing for me to get rid of? There's
nothing for me to get engaged with.
And sensuality is pleasant once you're given in to it.
But you want to look as to why did you have to give in to it? Because it was painful.
And everybody knows that.
So that's what we spoke before, like the willpower and so on. That's where you should use willpower.
Not like saying no to everything and overcoming and making it like, you know,
prevailing over every single note. Just find things on account of which you suffer,
which is your attitude in regard to pleasure, your attitude in regard to pain,
your attitude in regard to neither pleasure nor pain. And yeah, prevail there, that's it.
You don't have to worry about anything else then. Because whatever you do won't be unwholesome,
because it's not rooted in trying to get rid of pain.
It's not rooted in the discrepancy.
Hence, it's our own ignorance and our own actions rooted in it that are perpetuating it,
that is obscuring the nature of things as they actually are.
So you remove your discrepant attitude or attitude that results in discrepancy,
that creates it, that generates it, then you see the way things are in the scene,
it's just the scene. They never anything, there never was anything more.
They couldn't have been anything more. In the, in the felt, there was just the felt.
In the perceived, there was the perceived. In the intended, there was the intended. Nothing else.
In the world, there was just the world.
So in that sense, you can truly learn from your pain, whatever that pain is.
Not through, like, psychologizing and developing some nice pleasing theories,
hence, you're learning in very common. No, with presence of pain, you automatically, simultaneously,
must have presence of direct luxurious attitude, unless you're fully enlightened.
So through presence of disagreeable, you have a basis for undoing your attitude towards the
disagreeable. Hence, yeah, pain is a great teacher. If done rightly, if you know how to look at it,
if you have a right view because if you know where to look, then all you have to do is
practice composure, self-control, restraint, because all these things will be revealing the nature of
feelings that are experienced unpleasantly, will be revealing the displeasure of sensuality,
the displeasure will will be revealing it, not creating it. And once you reveal the
displeasure that was making you have the attitude towards getting rid of the displeasure, you start
to undo the attitude automatically. That work can be in front of you always. Yeah, yeah sure, sure.
It is always, because it's always something felt, which means there's always attitude in
regard to whatever's being felt. Sorry, that's the only work that needs to be done. That's the
only work that's the work on the most fundamental level. If you fix things on the most fundamental
level, everything else built on double will be fixed equally. If you purify the stream at its
very origin top of the mountain, eventually even the rivers and seas that are being filled by that
stream will be purified. But you can be battling and trying to purify the rivers down the mountain
while there is still the source of pollution remains. And that's how, you know, when the
wheel says he purifies his mind from one wholesome thoughts, from thoughts of sensuality. That's
exactly how it's done, not by chasing every individual, I was thinking this, what does it mean? I would
know. What is the nature of this? Was it rooted in trying to get rid of the pain caused by a
central pleasure, prospect of central pleasure? Was it rooted in trying to get rid of the pain
caused by something disagreeable? Was it trying to get rid of the pain caused by something agreeable?
Was it trying to get rid of the pain caused by neutral? Either way, it's going to be either
centrality, ill will or delusion. So he doesn't entertain you on that level. And that's how he
purifies his behavior in every other regard.
