So it's about the ownership of a sense of self, that's your mistake, not the existence of your sense of self.
But usually people who jump into conclusion, ah, no self means there is no self.
Well, who is then talking and deciding and making all these choices?
And then if actually said I read in the suitors carefully, the Buddha never said there is no self.
But actually people ask him, so his master got them as saying there is self, and he'll be quiet.
Ah, so master got them as saying there is no self, and he'll be quiet.
Because either way, for this person self is already there, ownership is already there, and he can't see the ownership.
And that's where the problem is.
So, do you feel like you're your own?
No.
How come?
Because I cannot control my...
Well, in hindsight when you think about it, sure.
But say something that you wish for comes your way.
Are you happy and elated and accountable?
Something that you don't wish for comes your way.
Are you said about it?
Yes.
Means there is ownership in regard to the senses that can experience these things.
So then you can't say, oh, I don't regard myself as my own.
You might wish to not regard yourself as your own, but practically facts are showing you that you do,
because you still are liable to suffer and feel on account of changing things.
And that's really the problem.
It's all about denying things, denying yourself.
It's just gratuitous ownership that we exercise over our own senses.
And if you want the weather, you're exercising ownership, and I'm just asking yourself,
would I suffer if something changes that I don't like?
If you wouldn't suffer, means, okay, I'm along the right path.
That's why that self-honestly needs to become first.
When the weather said person needs to understand, there is good action, there is bad action,
there is a good result, bad result, there is the given, there is this, there is the practice.
Because if a person is denying all of that, then exactly, they wouldn't necessarily see where the problem is
and where to apply their effort.
And then it would be like, oh, there is no self, so what is there for me to do anyway?
Yeah, there is no self, you can say that, but there is suffering.
You're still liable to suffering, and that's what you need to do.
And once you start doing that right, you get to understand, that's what it would have meant by not self.
It's what the suffering is, not any kind of random theoretical scientific sense of experiment that proves that nothing's real and but not.
Because when he approached the first disciples after his enlightenment, they asked him, oh, what teaching?
And he didn't say, oh, I'm telling you, there is no self.
He just said, there is suffering, and I'm teaching freedom from it.
Because that's something that everybody can universally relate to.
When he met the man before that, in the same suit, when he was going down the road, and this man sees me,
oh, you look very bright, very composed, who's teaching did you follow to develop those faculties?
And he said, I follow no one's teaching.
I'm my only leader.
I'm the supreme ruler of humans and gods.
I'm the best, which is pure fact.
Nothing conceded about it.
But in this man's eyes, through his own conceit, all he could see is like, I am the best.
And I was so beat and left.
I didn't want to hear the rest, what I'm going to have to say.
So clearly, by the time the Buddha reached these other disciples, he realized if he approaches them with a sense of,
I know what the truth is, they're going to be undefensive.
But he does know what the truth is, but people won't hear it.
So then he related that which they can relate to internally, which is, you're liable to suffering.
Even if you don't necessarily suffer, you are liable.
And eventually you will have to, old age, sickness, death, inevitable.
And I'm teaching freedom from it.
And I was like, oh, okay.
Like, oh, yeah, I want that.
And that's how they start to listen to him.
Although they tried to dismiss him first, because he wasn't part of the group anymore.
Anyway, that's it.
So that's, in answer to the question, there is no self, there is self.
But you should try not to own it.
Because you can just say, oh, there is no self, there is both, there is neither.
Factually, you remain liable to suffering and you don't know the way out.
And that's the core of the teaching, suffering and freedom from it.
And that brings me to practice of matter.
Well, you want to ask yourself, why do you want to do it?
Why are you doing it?
What's the purpose of imitations?
Personally, I want to focus myself.
That is my main thing.
And what would be the purpose of that?
To calm my mind.
And what would be the purpose of that?
Why do you prefer a calm mind?
Again, yes, free of suffering.
Because a non-calm mind bothers you.
So why go a round way about it when you can start thinking about what makes calm mind calm?
Or what disrupt the mind?
Does sense desire disrupt the mind if you want something that you don't have?
Does somebody say something upsetting and you refuse to let go of it?
Does that disrupt the mind?
So you realize you don't need to do meditation to calm your mind.
You need to stop disrupting it yourself with your own choices and actions.
And then meditation comes out of that.
Usually people hear about meditation and they use it wrongly in a sense of,
you try to replace issues with matter.
Like, oh, if I do matter, it will come in place of this.
But the place of your problem is not in things.
The place of your disturbed mind is not in because somebody said something upsetting to you.
It's because your mind got upset when I count something that's being said to it.
And you can't replace that.
You can only train it to not do that anymore.
And then you realize, I don't need to suffer, I made suffering.
That's what Buddha said if the mind is developed.
You would endure the unpleasant harsh insults, words, attacks,
in the same sense you endure wind, cold, sun, like elements.
Completely nothing personal about it.
But you take the ownership of it and it's automatically personal.
And then you don't have to deal with it.
And then you hear about matter and not use specifically.
Everybody does by that.
And then you hope, if I develop this meditation, someone's meditation will push this whole thing out
and I will never be able to get angry or something like that.
You get angry by giving into anger.
You get lustful by giving into lust, by making choices based upon it,
by having non-restraint.
Because that's what's in common, by the way, to pursuing sensual desire,
acting out anger, acting out of carelessness is lack of restraint,
lack of self-control.
So then you could draw a line and say that, oh, so your mind gets disturbed
when you don't have enough control over yourself.
And that's entirely up to you.
Nobody can control you for you.
And people don't have enough control over themselves
because they don't think enough about it.
They expect circumstances to control them,
whatever tradition, duty, values.
And they do to some extent, but you want to take it on a new level
whereby you take control of your sensory strength,
of your verbal actions, of your physical actions.
That's already the beginning of wisdom.
Five precepts will then take it for a rate, precepts and so on.
So we have to always start with the five precepts.
Not just you have to start.
You always stay within them, by the way.
Like, even when you start practicing meditation,
then you don't do it, it's within the five precepts,
so you just continuation of the same principle.
Of that sense of non-disturb mind that comes from controlling your actions.
That's why literally, in its core, the Buddha said,
he teaches action and freedom from action.
And action is already a choice.
It's already on a level of an action.
Hey boy, it's okay.
It's okay, man.
Do you think he wants to go out?
No, I think he's just strangers in his space.
He wants to let you know the boss is.
Oh, yes, he is.
Okay, he's not used to it.
So, I mean, like, you have to be very disciplined
and following precepts and all that
before we can actually develop wisdom.
Well, that's already the beginning of wisdom.
It's a mistake to separate it.
It's a mistake to think our wisdom will then come after it.
Doing that is already the beginning of wisdom.
Because you're already becoming transparent in regard to your own motives.
Where your intentions and choices are rooted.
And then you would know, little, this isn't wholesome.
Like, this is rooted in completely unskillful desires in me.
The world can praise it.
They can say, this is a great thing to do.
You have so much passion.
But from the standpoint of wanting to have a mind that is calm,
you realize, no, this is incompatible.
I can't have that.
And the reason why people have entertained these things is because they don't.
They don't accept.
They don't look at it.
They're not transparent.
They don't know it.
Because everybody wants to have their mind calm.
Even people say they don't.
They do.
That's why you always pursue pleasure and stuff.
Because it's satisfaction.
It's already a form of calmness.
And that's what people have dependent on it.
Because they don't know any other type of satisfaction.
Except, like, central satisfaction or satisfaction.
Real will and retaliation and so on.
Okay.
So, my question is, if the Buddha intended to not be worshipped as a god
or any part of his musical self idolized as a Buddhist,
is it acceptable to visit places like the lot of Maligawa
to worship his sacred tooth or Adam's tooth to worship his footprint?
The thing is, not all people do their...
And neither Buddha is going to do their practice for the same reason.
So, if you visit Maligawa because it will just remind you of the Buddha
and the possibility of enlightenment, that's fine.
And the Buddha did say, yeah, when they're asking, what should we worship when you die?
There were no statues.
And he said, make no statues of me.
He was only came later with the Greeks when they came to India.
But he got quickly established because it's easier for people to worship
something that resembles a person or rather than these symbols
that already require a degree of wisdom and recognition.
However, the Buddha did say you can worship the symbol.
Like, by the body tree, they will remind you of enlightenment.
You might think about enlightenment.
You might spell something in you that you maybe want to do it.
You should worship the sign of an arms ball, which means there's a possibility
to give up the world and be renounced.
And then to see the reminds you of the teaching and so on.
So, it's all these symbolic things.
Just they might make somebody think about a dharma.
And that's it. That was the sole purpose of worship.
But nowadays, most people worship out of superstition.
And there is absolutely nothing to do with Buddhist teaching or Buddhism.
But that is what Buddhism is today.
Whatever the other religion is today.
It's firstly superstition.
And then within that, those who are interested in modern superstition
get to find out the teaching.
So, if you visit Maligava so you can pass your test exams,
it has absolutely nothing to do with anything that Buddha taught.
If you visit Maligava because you want your wishes to come true,
again, it's completely misplaced.
If you visit, because another way of misplacing it, if you think you can visit shrines
and somehow get closer to enlightenment simply by physically visiting, you know,
stupas and whatnot, there's absolutely nothing to do with it.
The enlightenment can only come with the self-restraint, understanding and wisdom.
And so, in that sense, this can be helpful.
You get inspired maybe and then you want to read the Buddhist teaching.
Once you visited some statue or something.
But it's a very remote sense.
And I often come to people who think, as long as you worship,
you're somehow getting closer to nibana.
And that's just wishful thinking.
That is how it is presented.
Well, of course, because it's much easier than if I tell you,
no, you need to be perfectly restrained.
You need to give up things you like.
And sometimes in you, the things you don't like.
You don't want to hear that.
Only few people can hear that and accept it.
So, it's easier for me as well to just hear.
It's just very respect and challenge this.
You'll be fine.
You'll be able to do nibanas and all that.
I wonder what they say about Amisupu Jain,
what they thought they were in those days.
In his teachings.
Nothing.
Nothing.
He said about alms and being generous.
Not just amongst, but in general.
That's like making money.
But that's not bringing you closer to enlightenment.
They're just bringing you closer to a more wholesome mind,
better rebirths and so on.
But in enlightenment, you need to abandon it all.
You can't like give your way in terms of gifts to enlightenment.
It doesn't work like that.
And that's the problem.
It's not a problem that you don't necessarily pursue enlightenment.
But the problem is when people then intentionally develop a view
that, oh, I don't need to pursue it.
And I can do this.
And by doing these random things, I'm somehow also getting closer to it.
And because of that, you never really admit to yourself
that you're not getting closer to enlightenment
just by random acts of generosity.
And even good karma when you accumulate so many.
It's still karma.
It is still karma.
That's the whole point.
That's what I mean.
He teaches action and freedom from action.
And action is good action and bad action.
So, yes, you need to replace bad action with good action.
But now you need to abandon that as well.
If you really want enlightenment.
And for that, you can't have like good action
somehow resulting self-cancelling action
and you become fully enlightened on a hunt.
Because, literally, we will just prescribe.
Give this, give this, give this, and you'll be enlightened.
But it didn't.
Never.
It has to come within anyways, right?
Somebody cannot.
Like somebody can write you.
That's why he himself says whatever is to obtain,
to be obtained by the manly effort.
I've done it.
And that's why it cannot be taken away.
Because you do it for yourself.
It doesn't depend on the external factors.
It's not given to you like, you know,
sudden divine providence.
It's just no.
It doesn't come that way.
So, in that sense, that's what I mean.
If you're clear as to why and what for,
and keep clarifying if you're not clear,
then you get to realize what you really want.
And then you get to do it properly as well
without misconceiving it.
And you might be fine.
Like, god, man, look, enlightenment seems too far out of my reach.
But let me then focus on things that are not without my reach.
That the Buddha himself, who might respect enough to follow the teaching,
said, a layman should do.
But it's where layman, like, especially in the West,
or who it is for 20 years practicing,
and they don't even keep the presets.
Doing meditation retreats and stuff,
still drink alcohol and it's like, no restraint.
And as I could see, the contradiction you're living
is because of your own ignorance.
No one else's fault.
But if you were to make the effort,
instead of having a wishful thinking of your genres and whatnot,
focus on what you are first and perfect that.
And then you see whether you're happy with it,
or whether you will come among,
or commit your restaurant to retreat.
But they want to have it all at the same time.
Oh, I can also practice for enlightenment.
And I can also, you know,
have my desires as a layperson and so on.
So you have to pick one.
You have to recognize what your situation is
and take responsibility for it.
Okay.
Yeah.
Because that's what I mean.
If you renounce the world,
it's because you chose to do so.
If you don't renounce the world,
it's because you chose to do so.
There's no external authority or criteria
that demands from you to stay layperson or not.
It's purely my choice.
Yeah.
But every choice means you're responsible for it.
And that's the bit that people try to avoid because it's unpleasant.
See, if I accept responsibility
that I'm not renouncing the world,
means I have to accept responsibility for anything
that comes at me from that world that I haven't renounced.
I have to accept responsibility for anything that results
out of my unenlightened mind.
I can't complain about it.
Because I choose to remain in the environment
where these things can happen.
And that's not easy to bear necessarily for everyone.
So people would then try to kind of mask that.
And then at the same time,
develop a sense that,
but no, I am still practicing renunciation
and everything while I'm not really.
So you just need to learn how to be really, really,
even brutally honest with yourself.
Nobody else.
What are you doing and why are you doing it?
Same.
I want to meditate.
Why?
Why?
Why?
Why?
Because I don't want to suffer.
So how do I suffer when I don't meditate?
Not necessarily.
Do I suffer when I act out unwholesomely?
Oh, that's the root of my suffering.
So let me deal with that,
and then maybe meditation will become more obvious later.
But for people,
as I said,
meditation becomes extension of what I want fulfilled for me.
And that's why I want work.
Not in the manner released.
Okay.
So I have a question that I was thinking about.
So I was wondering,
how do you decide what is a comfort or something
that you need to give up?
Because I have some of my questions,
so also another part I was thinking about
was the use of technology inputs
like phones, for example.
Is that allowed?
Is that not if you were pursuing the path of enlightenment?
Those are tools.
Okay.
It's not tools are not necessarily wrong.
It's the purpose of the use.
So if you use your phone to cheat,
steal, engage in sensuality,
spread hate, it's wrong.
But it's not the usage of the phone that's wrong.
It's your intention and your action
that's being acted out by the phone.
If you use the phone to Google the suitors
and read the translations online,
it's of course not wrong.
If you use the phone to communicate when communication is needed,
it's not wrong.
If you use the phone to just chit chat random gossip,
it's wrong, but again, not because of the phone,
but because of the intention behind your action
and what you're doing.
So that's why it's not like,
it's not prescribed.
Like, you know, you have those Christian orders where you shun
or you must shun anything new and stuff.
Not at all.
It's the tool.
You mustn't shun your responsibility for your actions.
But people try to like throw away the tools
because then they will blame the responsibility
and the tools.
See, it's the phone's fault.
It's the internet's fault that I can't be restrained.
No, it's your own fault that you're not restrained.
Okay, so technology is okay in the lab.
Exactly.
It's why you're using your fault.
It always defines whether it's right or wrong.
Yeah.
So that's why it can't be a blanked one.
No, technology is absolutely fine or it's absolutely wrong
because people will use it for different purposes.
Same, like knives, folks.
You can use the harm somebody with it.
Right.
Or you keep very practical.
You can't survive in the wilderness without it.
So.
Okay.
So another question I had was,
okay, so the concept of, you know,
reincarnation and good karma and bad karma.
So, you know, I guess, like,
if my understanding is correct,
when you accumulate good karma and bad karma,
it goes, I guess, in terms of when you're being reborn,
in terms of, you know,
how you'd be reborn into your next life, essentially.
How do you, like, so my question is, I guess, essentially, like,
how about this current life?
Like, how do you end suffering when you're in the present?
Right.
Well, yeah, that's the point.
If you were to approve the desire from your mind
and concede, you would be approving any basis for suffering.
Okay.
So.
That's how you do it.
Okay.
But that's something you can't do in a sense of just perform.
That's something that you can't just be generous,
pay your way to your life when you're just generous,
or something, because that's just another level of doing.
So that's what I would say.
First, you need to be very sensory-strained.
You need to keep the presets and restrain your desires
and only recognize things that, okay, I, you know,
I need to give into this or something like that.
But not like, as a blanket mode of being,
whereby you always say yes,
and then only sometimes say no when you can't get what you want.
It's out of the way around.
It's more like, no, I'll keep myself in check only when I can't,
but even then means I'm responsible for it.
That's the first step.
There has to be, to fully accept that you are responsible.
See, people think they suffer because things are unpleasant,
but you don't.
You suffer because you resist the displeasure that you feel.
So suffering itself is a concept.
Pain is not suffering.
Right.
Resisting pain by default is suffering.
That's, that's why the craving is the root of suffering,
not feeling is the root of suffering.
Okay.
So if you want to be free from suffering this life,
you have to stop craving, stop resisting, stop indulging.
Right.
What you feel right here right now.
Okay.
And the first step is to stop acting blindly
on account of what you feel right here right now.
Right.
Then you get to round up and see, okay.
So you're not acting by the body, you're not acting by the speech,
and then you get to see how your mind is affected by what you feel right now.
And that's where the craving is, in your mind.
But you cannot prove the craving in your mind
while your physical actions are still very much engaging.
Okay.
And rooted in that same craving.
Okay.
So suffering itself is like how you, how you perceive something
or how you, how you conceive and how you conceive something
and that is what causes, brings you that stuff later, right?
Yes.
It's slightly more immediate than that though.
Okay.
It's literally when you are touched by disagreeable,
your mind automatically leans away from it.
Right.
That's the default.
Okay.
When you're touched by agreeable, your mind automatically leans towards it.
Right.
And is that leaning is the root of suffering.
Oh.
Not being touched in the first place.
Okay.
That's why in the cases of fully enlightened monks,
you know, something they got attacked under the road and stabbed and stuff,
and they didn't suffer on account of it.
It doesn't mean they didn't feel the physical discomfort on account of it.
They did.
They did, right.
But you realize that was never really the problem.
The problem was you're not being able to not lean towards or against
when you're touched by a feeling.
Okay.
And you couldn't do it because you haven't understood it.
And that's why the sensory strain needs to come first because by default,
people would first and foremost blame the external world for whatever they felt.
See, I feel the suffering because such and such person upset me.
No, such and such person had something to say disagreeable to you,
but you leaning away, trying to get the radio, trying to override the
disagreeability in you, that's your suffering.
Not what they said.
But if you never look in that direction, you'll remain blaming them
and then feeling justified in hating them and so on.
So first that needs to be restrained and then you get to understand what the problem really is.
Yeah.
I think I have one more.
So do you love any one of these thinking?
I don't know.
I was just wondering, so I was just thinking,
how can I make sure to use the full path and I'm such in my daily life?
Like making sure the five precepts also make sure that I follow the right action and the right speed.
Well, within the five precepts, that's only the type of right action.
So you can follow five precepts by the body and follow them by the speech
and then you can extend the same practice on the mind.
And that's exactly, that's kind of the order you can develop as well.
You can't extend them on the mind while your body is not restrained.
But usually people associate a precept or just a bodily commandment or something like that.
They're principles that you need to start applying first onto the body.
But then yes, so you're not obviously killing anybody physically,
but you might have harmful thoughts that you're harboring and detaining, thinking intentionally.
You will not act, you will not harm physically anybody,
but you might be gossiping or slandering somebody out of the same ill will.
It would result in someone else's committing killing.
So then you realize, so yeah, I'm obviously keeping the five precepts on the level of the body,
but why don't I restrain my mind from thinking bad and harmful thoughts towards others?
So you use the same principle of five precepts and restraint
by applying it now on an even more accurate level, which is the level of your mind.
So even if you're not drinking, stealing, cheating, lying and so on,
but am I thinking about these things?
Am I thinking thoughts that are rooted in the same basis
that result sometimes in cheating or stealing, getting what I want on account of, you know,
sort of screwing up others and so on?
Am I thinking thoughts that are just unrestrained, sensual?
Am I thinking thoughts that are maybe not sensual but careless, harmful to me, to others,
and they're not doing on that mental level either?
Because it is a choice as well, it's just most people are not aware of that choice
because they're not even aware of the bodily choices they make.
But once you start restraining that, these will become more obvious.
Okay.
So the key essentially is to start by controlling those atmospherically
and then moving on to the mind.
Yeah, and then the mind will become apparent within those physical restraint that you just created.
I got it.
So it's like trying to tame wild dogs while they're still wild.
You know, if you keep trying to chase them or something, good luck.
You never know it.
So you first put up a fence.
You round up a perimeter and then within that you get to see, you get to learn about it
and then become more familiar with it and then they start to listen to you.
But most people won't arrive at that stage of like full control,
commanding the senses in the mind without even having set up the basic fence around the behavior.
And then they hope like somehow meditation will magically bridge their gap.
Right.
Oh, I don't want this religious sign of restraint and whatever.
Just teach me meditation and enlightenment.
Right.
I mean, even when the Buddha died, there's all these other hands,
like 500 fully enlightened monks came together.
And so let's re-decide the teaching so that it gets remembered.
And then they said, well, what do we recite first?
We recite our rules, patimaka, sensory strain, presets or do we recite dharma first?
And you would think, of course, you recite dharma says no.
There is no dharma without the basis of rules.
So we must recite the rules first.
So they called one who knew all the rules and he recited all the rules and how they came to be.
And only when there was completely exhausted.
Okay.
Now let us recite the words of the Buddha himself, not before the rules have been recited.
So if the other hands needed to follow that order,
if the fully enlightened people needed to follow that order,
what is to say for somebody who's just starting their practice?
It's not optional.
Yeah.
Most of the time it is the other way around.
Are you completely?
Yes.
I know the West especially.
Because in the West people don't even have the traditional kind of imposed values
and anything vaguely religious, it's dismissed as a religious oppression.
Right.
So you can't even talk about restraint without them associating that with like, you know,
crazy Christian times, you know, 17th and 18th century in Europe,
but it's just like you kill people who don't keep commandments,
which is against the commandment, but the irony was lost in them, I guess.
So, and then they hear like, you know, the esoteric Buddhism, whatever else,
and then they hear meditation and they think, oh, if I just get the right meditation,
that's it.
I don't need to deal with anything else.
And, you know, sometimes you have all these other schools of Buddhism like later on that came.
They're very much cater to that.
Oh, you don't need this.
No, no, no.
You can be married and be a monk.
You can do this and be a monk.
You can do the ambient light.
And it sounds like one of those fake adults that you can have it all for 199, you know.
And it's just, but people believe in it because they want to believe in it.
Because it's easier.
And they are comfortable.
Of course.
Yeah, exactly.
And they're like, oh, I need to give anything else.
It's so difficult to achieve.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But that's what I mean.
You might realize that it's not that difficult if you actually start accepting responsibility
for what you already are doing.
It's nothing out of the audience.
It's just because you ignore it.
You keep it in this project and now I can't pass on.
No, wait.
Wait, wait.
Let me accept this first and then I'll see.
Maybe I can get more.
Maybe I want more.
So you get to learn as a result of it.
Okay.
Can I ask a question?
How long have you been in your life?
15 years.
15 years?
2005.
I started as a layman but a couple of years before that, like reading the sutas and keeping
the presets.
And you were always interested in that?
No, no, no.
One of us was 22.
Okay.
Before that I was very much not interested in any of that.
Any of that.
Yeah.
But at the same time I was becoming dissatisfied with just a genetic, you know, sensual lifestyle.
And I got interested in meditation as every westerner does without religion.
Right.
But I had like nobody really like to ask for Buddhist groups.
Nothing.
And not really other religious groups at the time.
Certainly not in my city.
So I was just going to go to a library and read the books.
Religion and philosophy.
So I was reading everything.
Hinduism and yoga, all sorts of things.
Christianistics, everything, everything.
And nothing was...
No, no, no, no, no, no.
And then I came and exited across the book of Yugoslavia monk in Sri Lanka in the 60s.
And then he translated the actual sutas.
And yeah, I read the first sutas of suffering, freedom, liability.
And I had that recognition that, yeah, my life is really good.
I was actually working for an American company more money than I can spend.
Absolutely no problem with that.
But at the same time you recognize you are liable to things changing.
And I could not ignore that.
Oh, I could all work out for the best.
Okay, well if it doesn't.
You see people around you, it doesn't always work out for the best.
But you just pretend that your life will always be the best manner you want yet.
So I was just becoming aware of the fact that there was nothing particular bothering me,
but I was becoming aware of the fact that some things could bother you.
And you won't have a control over it.
And there was beginning to bother me.
That recognition.
So then I sort of wind down my lifestyle.
Big by bit.
I saved up some money and went to become one.
And because that's the thing I felt responsible.
Oh, I don't have to become one.
It's not an imperative.
But if I choose to stay in this life, whatever, in 30 years time,
if things that I don't like happen to me, it's on me.
Because I chose to stay.
Because now I know there is a way out, in terms of what is teaching,
but I chose to not follow it.
Because I'm now responsible for whatever stages are the result of not following the way out.
Some people decide to stay, but to me, there was not a right choice.
Doesn't mean it was easy to leave.
But it was, yeah, it felt like a duty.
Something we're doing.
I understand impermanence in like a logical way.
Exactly.
But my parents are older, and I don't think they are going to be around too long.
How do I prepare myself to, I mean, I know, like, I know, like...
Well, no, that's not a knowledge.
Like, that's information.
You have information about impermanence, but you have no understanding of it.
Because if you truly understand impermanence, it results in the removal of any ownership you might have
over your parents and your own life.
But you still have the ownership because you still feel that you're liable to suffer, exactly.
Which means you haven't understood impermanence then.
So you need to understand impermanence by starting, like, not in that logical manner,
but realize that, like, what you're currently feeling now, right here, right now,
whatever, good or bad or neutral, doesn't matter what it is.
It's already something that's not in your control.
And you don't need to go into, like, psychological and scientific explanation
as to why it's not in your control.
It doesn't matter why.
The fact is that it's not in your control, yet you are acting as if it is in your control.
I mean, did you have any say in your parents getting old?
It's even inconceivable as an abstract thought to have a say in it.
Yet here we are acting as if it shouldn't happen.
So, again, you can continue acting like that, and that's where you remain liable
to when those things happen, remain liable to being affected by them.
Or you can start uprooting those gratuators' wrong views.
Yeah, but that's what we're going to say.
You just watch your nostrils and you become an iron.
And here you reflect on the nature of things, the nature of your actions, the nature of your choices.
Think about it.
Because by thinking about it, you stop ignoring the obvious that you're not in control.
And people ignore the obvious because lack of control from the point of view of control is very unpleasant.
It's anxiety and fear and all of it.
But it's only so because you completely ignore it and then only sometimes it's thrown on you.
But if you actually start thinking about it in a measured manner and stop ignoring it,
it will cease to scare you.
Because you realize, well, when I'm afraid not, this is the factual state of affairs.
That's when I was saying that this morning to one of the monks, that's when the Buddha died,
some monks were not fully enlightened.
They were like, now what will happen now?
But the monks, they were enlightened.
They were saying, of course, how can that which was born not die?
I mean, for them, it became inconceivable to grieve over it.
It's madness, in a way.
How can you, like, they couldn't fathom it.
How can you grieve over it?
Over something that's obviously have to go.
Yet people grieve over things that have to go.
And they know they have to go, but they still grieve over things.
Why?
Because you ignore the fact that we will go and only address it when you have no choice about it.
Same, like contemplation of, you know, I'll get old, I'll get sick.
And that's why I'm going to say that you are responsible for that, because you keep yourself
pretty much intoxicated, like a drunk man, with life, with health, and with youth.
You know it will go away, but you don't think about it.
And by not thinking about it, you intoxicate yourself with it while it's present.
That's why a healthy man always thinks he'll be healthy.
And even when you think about non-healthy, you think like in a second person manner,
not like something that directly applies to me.
Because if I start thinking, no, no, no, it's this health, it's this youth, you're going to feel that.
And, you know, you're so used to avoiding what you feel, or only chasing what you want to feel,
that by default you will be turning away from it.
So that's why we'll compare the practice of dummies going against the grain.
Now, against the string.
Not like denying everything, but basically seeing the things are rooted and then stop ignoring it.
By not ignoring it, you see the origin of this.
Oh, I'm intoxicating because now I'm healthy, but do I have even say in this health?
Who knows, I might be having cancer growing in me or something like that.
You get scared.
Well, the only reason you got scared is because you refuse to think about it.
It's like the most certain thing, by the way, when you think about it.
Death.
As soon as you're born, it's absolutely a must.
Everything else is optional.
Yet the most certain thing is like the last thing a people's mind.
Because they choose to put it last and keep it last and press it there to be last,
because it's too unpleasant to admit it.
But if you train yourself towards that unpleasantness, it won't be unpleasant anymore.
It's only unpleasant because the dog chases you only because you start running away from it.
If you stand your ground, it won't chase you.
It won't even attack you.
But if you give in to the run, it will go after you.
And that's exactly.
You start giving in to avoiding this, and that's how it goes after you.
It's okay.
It's okay.
It's okay.
It's okay.
It's okay.
It's okay.
It's okay.
It's okay.
Yeah, we're all good questions.
Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm.
