So can a lay lifestyle lead to becoming an arahant?
A lay lifestyle, no. No, that's impossible.
The question, yeah, that's often asked, is can a layman be an arahant?
But that depends what's meant by layman. If you mean that somebody
is not a formal ordain, doesn't wear robes, then yes, a layman can become an
arahant. But if by a layman you mean by taking in the lifestyle of a layman,
living in company, still having concerns with the world,
living a household life, not being sensory-strained, that's impossible.
So from that point of view, a layman cannot be an arahant.
That's when the suit is a layman, as in a person not ordained in the big order,
but became an arahant. He wasn't a householder,
who became an arahant. He was a person who wasn't ordained, but wasn't living
as a householder either. So the most famous case is Bahia,
who himself was a naked, a buddhbhak ascetic. He was just waiting buddhbhak
to cover himself, and he was living very austerely,
mindfully, practicing for who knows how long, and he was so pure that
he himself thought he's fully enlightened. And then the devout of
compassion said, no, actually not fully enlightened, go and meet the Buddha.
And that's the famous instruction where the Buddha, all he needed to say to him,
was in the scene, let there just be the scene, in the herd,
let there just be the herd, and so on, for all the senses.
And he became an arahant. So technically he was a layman, he wasn't
he wasn't a monk, he wasn't an ordain, because then he asked the Buddha,
oh, can I join your order? He said, yeah, go and find the ball and the rope,
but then he got killed by a cow. So technically he was a layman who became
an arahant, but you realize he was far from
living a layman's life. He was basically a type of
summoner, an ascetic, just not ordained in the order.
And often that's where the lines get blurred. People say, oh, so you don't
need to be a monk, as in you don't need to be formally ordained
to become an arahant, means I can live a household life
and become an arahant. No, you need to live like a monk.
Whether you wear robes and you're ordained formally or not, that doesn't
matter. But the lifestyle of somebody who has renounced the world,
who is sense-restraint, well, that matters, that is a necessary basis for it.
While this constitutes a summoner, sense-restraint,
celibacy, seclusion, devoted to seclusion, as much as possible,
and not being engaged, preoccupied, concerned,
inspired by worldly affairs. So you might need to do some worldly
things to some extent, even as monks you have to.
But that's one thing, doing it as like a chore
and doing it because you're still driven by it and you still want it and you
still desire towards it. So that must be abandoned.
So technically you can live a lay life, but
if you were able to live lay life, yet be so withdrawn from everything,
succeeding that, why don't you just become a monk? Nothing would stop you from
becoming a monk. So usually when somebody
doesn't become a monk, it's because something is still stopping them in the
world, which is a form of concern, and that in itself
is an impediment for if they want to be an arhat.
So one can go forth without ordaining?
Yes, but not because you feel like you've gone forth,
but because you actually became sort upon or higher.
And that's why the noble Arya Sangha in the Suttas
includes lay people, they were not monks, but they were actually
Aryas. And consequently one can go forth and
ordain and still be a householder in his mind.
So wearing robes is not a guarantee that you will,
that you are a Samana, that you have that distinction of a noble Sangha.
