So this is a sutta maybe for monks really, a discussion for monks, maybe they would understand
it a bit more. But in any case it's called one in training. So the Buddha says, monks
of this recitation of more than 150 training wars, he means patimoka, comes up every fortnight
in reference to which sons of good families desiring the goal train themselves. They are
these three trainings under which all that is gathered, which the training in heightened
virtue, the training in heightened mind and the training in heightened discernment. These
are the three trainings under which all that is gathered. So there is a case where a monk
is fully accomplished in virtue, moderately accomplished in samadhi and moderately accomplished
in discernment. With reference to the lesser and minor training wars, he falls into offences
and rehabilitates himself, he confesses them and says, why is that? Because I, so why is
that? Because I have not declared that to be a disqualification in these circumstances,
meaning being holy accomplished in virtue, doesn't disqualise that yet. But as for
the training rules that are basic to the holy life and proper to the holy life, he is one
of permanent virtue, one of steadfast virtue. Having undertaken him, he trains in reference
to the training rules. And with the ending of the first three fetters, he is a stream
winner, a sotopanna, never again destined for the states of woe, certain, headed for
self-awaking. And it goes on through that through the different levels of attainment
all the way up to Arahantsha. On the basis of that, fully accomplished in virtue, fully
accomplished in the same sense that the mountain stream would fill out the bottom pools, they
would overfill and fill up the bottom pools. And eventually even the sea would be filled
up. And at the end of that sutta, he says, those who are partially accomplished attain
the path, those who are fully accomplished attain the full thing. The training rules
I tell you are not in vain. And that's the important part. The rules that are essence
of the training are basically the eight precepts. Whenever the guru will talk about the wise
man of the past, the virtuous people of the past, it's the eight precepts of these principles
that you can have many other rules in the monastic manner, many other rules, but they're
all kind of within that. The one, the rules, the matter. Then you have the circumstantial
social rules and so on minor rules. But the ones that matter for the training are basically
the ones that are around lust, aversion, distraction, and delusion. That's it. So yes, that's meant
for monks, but actually even the late person, if they become accomplished in eight precepts,
they can expect the same. Heightened mind and heightened discernment. Many lay people
in the sutta were Anagamis, they were teaching monks, the new monks, because they were so
developed. So what is that development? Is it the technical
letter of the rule, prescribed by the contemporary tradition? Where is it? So what is that accomplishment?
What does it make accomplished? Is it knowing the letter of every rule and looking for
every technicality or knowing the state of mind and intention behind directions, which
is closer? So whenever people are latching onto technicalities and the letter of the
rules, it's when the intention for the state of mind is either obscured, not taking responsibility
for or blatantly just to be avoided. So you don't feel responsible, because this is the
tradition that I follow, this is the rules that I follow, this is the letter that I follow,
and I don't think, I don't need to think for myself. And because of that, you can follow
such rules in such manner for hundreds of years, have like the full ordination, the
highest approval, and still not be accomplished in virtue. And that's exactly what Cilabhar
Paramah says, taking on virtue as a sense of external duty, for which you're not allowing
yourself to feel responsible for internally. And why would a person not allow themselves
to feel responsible for that? Because the moment you become responsible, you become liable
to doubt. So that's exactly why Cilabhar Paramahasa is bundled with a factor of doubt. If you actually
manage to break yourself away from the dependence on the external letter and take responsibility
for the virtue, you will creating a basis for overcoming the factor of doubt. But if you
don't allow yourself to step away from it in that correct sense, in that correct direction,
you will never overcome doubt. Because the reason why the duty is imposed by yourself
to yourself is so the doubt cannot arise. And you often see that when a mind that's dependent
on the letter, somebody points out that their letter might be wrong, they're overwhelmed.
I mean, we witness it many times. Overwhelmed with the existential doubt, because they realize
everything leading up to that was based on that letter saying what it says, so I didn't
feel responsible for it. Yet now somebody just questions that. They don't even prove
that the letter of your rule is wrong. They just start questioning and you are shaking.
And if that doesn't concern you means you lack even basic authenticity, basic self-awareness.
And that's why there is no right view for you. So you need to understand that that yes,
you learn the letter of the rules, but depending how far you're going to go into the letter
of the rules and why. Is it because I'm not really still understanding the rule? Sure,
go further. Is it? No, I understand the rule, but I want more technicalities to prevent
me from myself and from my own mind. Oh, you want to avoid the practice? Because that's
where Samad is as we said before. Things that want to overwhelm the mind, the monk doesn't
let the mind being overwhelmed. That's his practice of Samadhi. So you understood the
rule, you understand the eight precepts, you understand the ten precepts, you understand
150 training rules. If you're not clear about some rule, you clarify it. That's it. Now,
you practice. You practice in a way by keep making sure when you're about to act, you
act according with those rules or you have the calling with an ingredient on a version
on delusion. If you break it, you see where you broke it, you see why you broke it, and
you don't need to depend on technicality because you're always aware of your intention
behind the actions. And then if somebody points out technicality allows you this, but it's
like it doesn't. The state of mind doesn't allow you to do that. So if you actually
stop looking, if you start looking at the context of the rules, eight precepts, 150
precepts, and maintain the context of the rules in your mind, there will be no loopholes
for you, and there will be no need for the loopholes. If you start looking at the letter
that gets proliferated more and more and more into this definition of a sub definition
of a sub definition, then all of it, it will be about loopholes. It will be about things
that are left not addressed, and you know they come under the same context, but you
have drifted away from that context so much now into these particulars that you lost
the sight of the forest pretty much. And that's exactly when people and monks become
technical. Well technically I'm not breaking the rule and stuff. It's like, what is the
state of mind behind that action? You are breaking the virtue and the story. There is
no accomplishment in virtue unless you take the virtue on that level of the mind. But
people confuse learning about the rules, learning about technicalities for keeping the rules
and keeping the technicalities. In other words, they feel justified in not taking it personally,
in not taking responsibility for it, but projecting and keeping responsibility on the level of
well that's the tradition, that's the authority, that's how it's been for hundreds of years,
doesn't matter. You can choose to accept the tradition, the traditional rules, the traditions,
the standards, that's all fine. But even if you do so, you still have to recognize that
you're responsible for that. You're responsible for either choosing to interpret things for
yourself, for either choosing to follow this commentary, for either choosing to follow
someone else's interpretation or someone else's tradition, it's on you. Nothing justifies
you in choosing that. So in other words, you need to recognize that whether you understand
it for yourself directly or whether you follow someone else's interpretation, you need to
know why you are doing it. That needs to be clear to you. So if I ask you, oh, do you
give you a pre-set, yes. Well, the fifth pre-set, what's your standard on it? How do you understand
such and such circumstance? And you tell me, well, I follow the tradition of such and
such teacher. I, as a dog, that's fine. Why? You should be able to tell me, why do you
follow that? In other words, how is that way of like following that particular interpretation
or the rule or take on the rule? How is that feeding your accomplishment in virtue directly?
How is that connected to it? You can't just say, I follow because he's a great teacher.
Well, yeah, but what is the benefit of following that? Do you see that for yourself? Or you're
just going by mere reputation and mere tradition and hearsay, which is, you know, the Buddha
said many times something you shouldn't really do, unless you're very unwise. So be a follow,
you know, clarify whatever else, but never feel justified on just, oh, well, I belong
to this great tradition now. And these are our standards. And that's the end of the game
there. No. Why? Why do I keep these standards? Do I keep them authentically, individually,
personally, internally? In which case, I don't need the tradition in the standards because
it's kept on this level, not on the level of traditional behavior. And that's how exactly
what we're saying. If you actually accomplish yourself on that level in that virtue, where
you're not shying away from doubt by willing to endure it, clarifying the context, maintaining
the context, not proliferating the rule to prevent you from having doubt arise in your
mind again. Well, I will never do that again. Well, but it wasn't an offense. It was not
an issue. It wasn't even rooted in greed aversion delusion. But why am I doubting it?
Because that's what doubt is it's an irrational mind, a hindrance that tries to throw your
way, tries to make you act out of it. And here you are acting out of it. Because now
you're redefining and making new rules. So you will never do stuff that you know was
nothing wrong with just because you doubted and account of it. And you never you don't
know how to deal with the doubt. So by taking the taking the virtue wrongly, you will not
be able to deal with the doubt because of which you keep taking the virtue wrongly because
of which you can't deal with the doubt. And no samadhi, exactly, absolutely no samadhi
because there is no accomplishment. If you take the virtue rightly and do it without
don't act out of the doubt. Sustain the context of the virtue. No, because you know, you know
what it is, but the mind pressures you to find out more, look into technique, create
this, create that act, left, left, right, avoid, prevent. If you sustain that and not
act out of it, you will become accomplished in the virtue. And basically, how did you
do that? Oh, that's already the practice of samadhi. Not moving in regard to the mind
they want to move you. And that's what the Buddha said is just if somebody's accomplished,
at least in that basis, three factors will have to be destroyed. You cannot not be a
sautapana if you have taken virtue in that level and endured it. But you will certainly
not be a sautapana if you've taken virtue in the level of the external letter of the
law, the rule, the tradition, the authority, the agenda, the senior monk, whatever else.
Even if they were right, by the way, in the standards that they laid upon you, if you
took it externally, there is no basis for your virtue to actually take place.
So the first preset of not harming, not killing, a living being, why do you keep that? Why
is that wrong? And if you don't know why, you cannot be accomplished. It's just kind
of circumstantially taking that external rule. You learn them circumstantially. You investigate
them in circumstantially. But once you start keeping them, no, you need to know for yourself.
Like this needs to be seen personally. Like why this is not done? Why it's not good to
do this? So that's the thing. So you see what is unwholesome, what is wholesome. That is
your discernment. Well, we clear that is that's what you're going to start seeing. You're
going to start seeing wholesome is wholesome and wholesome is unwholesome because you're
seeing the root of that, which makes it unwholesome, what makes it wholesome. But you will not
see that if you just block it and say, Well, this is our tradition. This is my culture.
This is what a Buddhist person does. Well, okay. And that's that's literally applicable
to every other religion. That level of I am such and such identify with every religion
without observance without rule. I keep it. No questions asked. Because it makes you
safe. Well, exactly. Yeah, because we're all questioning means you don't want to keep
it. No question. It means I want to know what I keep. There's no there's no justification
for you assuming cynical reasons for my questioning. Unless it's your own cynical mind putting
that over there. No, I want to understand what I keep. But for many people, even questioning
to understand what will make you like, do I need to keep this? Do I want to keep this?
Do I want to be a monk? Do I want to practice? And that's something also that it makes you
unpleasant, makes you doubtful. So you refuse to think about it, you refuse to question,
you just double down. This is my duty. This is the tradition and you double down on your
own syllabata paramas. The very first fetter because of which, as I said, you can keep
the eight precepts for hundreds years and absolutely have no samadhi and wisdom arising
from it. If you look at the beginning of the monastic order, there were no rules. No,
of course. And why? Don't it was clear? Yeah. It was not obscured. People knew exactly
what behaviors were in line with it and what behaviors weren't. Yeah. So and that basic
you can boil it down to don't do anything. Unholesome. No way. Unholesome. Don't do
it. And that's why also as the things sort of progressed back in the Buddhist time, that
whole need for like, you know, a new monk would have to spend like five years training
with senior monk, somebody that they'd accepted him. Because yes, an untrained mind will start
like, you know, will not be able to necessarily even sustain the right context. So you want
to spend the first few years learning that context, but you don't want to spend the first
few years just learning the letter of the some tradition that you go into without actually
understanding why you're doing it or developing that authentic recognition that it's still
up to you, whether you keep it or not, and to what extent and you want to see the intentions
behind your actions there. Because that's often like, okay, so basically even that process
of learning for five years from a senior monk has become like a mechanical letter of stuff
you go through without actually learning. And without monk teaching you either. So just
for five years, you're under someone's like tutorship. But in reality is just basically
learning of that external form, external letter, not being taught responsibility behind, not
being taught how to see the responsibility behind and how to take it on, in which case
you would, you wouldn't even need them the further definitions of these rules, because
you would be unable to ignore the unwholesome intentions before you act. So you wouldn't
act. That's the training. But even training has become like a traditional form. In the
same sense, external on a level of syllabata paramasa on the level of virtue. Dead. Well,
yeah, it's just, it's like a dead matter in that sense. Yeah. But individually, anybody
can rekindle it for themselves if they actually exactly started in the suttas, reading the
origin stories and so on. And you start seeing food, you get you get in that livable context
and it's about the state of mind. It's about the lab, the perception how I perceive it.
What I choose to do, it's not about, you know, commentary of a sub commentary of a sub commentary
defining this is allowable. And then another commentary defining that is not allowable.
And me now spending nights and figure out who might be more right than these. No, where
is my attention rooted? You got your answer. And on top of that, not just that you got
the answer as to what is the right thing to do. You also started accomplishing yourself
in virtue, which is a basis for suttapat. So if you don't have the right view, if you
have not reached the few fruits of stream entry is because you haven't been accomplishing
virtue. And it's a good news, because now you know what to do. Comptuous haven virtue.
How do you do that? By taking it personally. Learning the rules, sure, learning interpretation
sure, but not relying on the word of the rule, the authority of interpretation of tradition
as this is why it's kept. No, it's kept because I choose to keep it. And I choose to keep
it because I see direct relationship between that and wholesome mind or not that and unwholesome
mind. And that will inevitably initially certainly bring the doubt, bring that sense
of Oh, so I could just decide to not keep exactly. And you're going to feel the weight
of keeping that. And that's how you become accomplished. But also doing that, you will
eventually begin to see which rules are actually obsolete. Yes, but you wouldn't really worry
about that. But you would become self evident. Exactly. The minor rules will not affect him.
And he will know that he'd stay confess, he wouldn't have an issue. But the sometimes
the problem is if a person is not accomplishing the virtue, and then get a sense of righteousness
of discovering of this, what we are saying. And then they just try to form a new tradition
of dismissing all the traditions and interpreting things for yourself in a same external manner
of seal about a paramasa. You don't need to change anything. You need to take things
personally. And then what needs to be changed will happen by itself. Because you have the
authentic mind, you have the accomplishment in virtue. Samad is there. What change occurs
will be the right change. You wouldn't have to do it. You wouldn't have to act out of
it. In other words, you would naturally drift away from things that are unsuitable, traditions
that are unsuitable, practices that are unsuitable into the directions that are suitable for the
right view, for dispassion and for everything else, without needing to make a big deal out
of it. But you wouldn't become this self righteous, impossible, impossible. You would not either
become scared. You wouldn't be self righteous trying to change everybody. But if everybody
comes after an account of it, you wouldn't show because you know what's right. So you
wouldn't need to change the established external norms. But you wouldn't be afraid to challenge
your mind because it's not rooted in your conceit. It's rooted in recognition of what
the accomplishment of virtue is and the right view. So if you were to question those things,
you wouldn't just, you know, be on a crusade to change though, as I said. But if it comes
up to it, you wouldn't be afraid of it. If circumstances bring it up, you will have no
issues dealing with it and addressing it. There's another sutta, Samanapala sutta. The Buddha
says, a manlicant, a monk, thus accomplished in virtue, sees no danger in any quarter in
regards to their virtuous restraint. It is like a king who has defeated his enemies. He sees
no danger from his enemies in any direction. In that same way, a monk, thus accomplished
in virtue, sees no danger in any direction in regards to their virtuous restraint. When
they have this aggregate, this domain of noble virtue, this kinder of noble virtue, they
experience a blameless happiness inside themselves. That is how a monk is accomplished in virtue.
So, yeah, you, the monk who has ceased to depend on the external circumstances, external
authority, external definitions, external rules, external requirements, has become accomplished
in virtue because internal criteria, as in not, I choose to interval, no, knowing right
is right, wrong is wrong, wholesome is wholesome, I hope, means knowing last aversion delusion,
sufficiently enough to always see it and not act out of it. You practice that, you will
become accomplished in that and then doesn't matter the circumstance, doesn't matter what
quarter the circumstances arrive at you from what direction. There is no danger because
you're not depending on that. So, if somebody comes and starts questioning the certain
interpretation of a letter or a rule, it doesn't matter because that's not what your virtue
is based on. It was based on you not doing anything out of intention of greed or version
delusion. So, even if somebody says, look, this, all these rules were actually wrong,
they were written by somebody later in Jai, in search of their, they're not right, makes
no difference. And you will actually know that they were right, even if somebody did
add them, they added them rightly because they're according to the standard of dhamma, standard
of dispassion, disenchantment, non-grid, non-version, non-delusion. But for as long as you put the
letter first, the external authority of syllabata baramasa first, you will not see this because
you're refusing to take responsibility for it and allow it to become internal because
it's unpleasant. The weight of it is unpleasant, the weight of responsibility is unpleasant,
the pressure is unpleasant, the liability to doubt it's unpleasant and you have to
do it. Developing of samadhi is unpleasant. And same, eight precepts for a lay person same.
That's why often the Buddha would not even overly define things because if the mind hasn't
strayed from the right context of non-grid, non-version, non-delusion, recognizes that
state of mind doesn't act harder with regardless of what the action might be, you don't need
extra and extra layers of definitions and words and interpretations and meanings because
the meaning is there, the context is there, it's clear. So that's practically eight precepts
are modern enough, certainly for anagami. In a lay setting, for a monkey, you'll be
concerned, accomplished to the same virtue, the same threat. I like the way it's said
like that he is accomplished or attained in possessors, the aggregate of virtue. He is
created in aggregate, that now he can recognize. He can recognize and he's encouraged to recollect
and dwell because it will re-inspire confidence and sense of safety and gladness that will
then bring Samadhi and so on to fulfilment and clear understanding of what, what, what,
but not without it. And that is, again, that is the entire practice. Your Samadhi comes
out of it, your Panya comes out of it. The more you do it, the more you perfect it,
greed aversion, delusion, removed from physical, verbal and mental. That's what Dhamma is.
So start on the physical level and that is your Samadhi, that is your Panya, that is
your practice towards Sotabhati and Haya. It's not found elsewhere, it's not found after,
it's right there and then. It's not done for just a short period of time and then. That's
one thing, it's better to even like, if you, if you, or eight pieces too much as a layperson,
take the five precepts for the rest of your life, but not for the weekend. Because means
you never really allow, you never really consider changing the order of what's important to
you. Sensuality is important to you. So now you realise that, yeah, precepts are good
and maybe I should do something about it, but then you only do it like for two or three
days or five days. Means, oh, you're just sort of toying with it while at the same time
refusing to allow the actual, no centrality to be put second and my precepts will now be
first for the rest of my life. And that's important. That's where the jianda takes the
training of virtue. You need to take it in that ultimate sense. Not to this conditional,
I'll do it a bit until I get a meditation experience or something. So it's in that sense,
it's better to have five precepts, but for the rest of your life, then to like, no precepts
and then super or steer level of celibacy for 10 days and then, boom, no precepts at
all. Because that is not accomplishing keeping. It's not accomplishing anything really. Like,
I mean, you're obviously trying. So that's a good thing, I suppose. But you want to recognize
the gradual training starts gradually and starts in that responsible sense, but an absolutely
non-negotiable sense. So you're like, okay, so what can I sustain? And what am I able
to? Can I make this determination for the rest of my life? To not kill, cheat, lie,
steal, misconduct, take in dog skirts. And if just that thought scares you, I can't do
this, that you need to do that first before you can even consider the direction of any
practice whatsoever. Because that is the practice. You considering that is the practice. You making
yourself being able to determine to keep the five pieces for the rest of your life or eight
pieces for the rest of your life is the beginning of your accomplishment in virtue. You won't
come up, come, come, like a, you won't result on its own somehow, because you got a very,
very, very potent meditation method that will now, if you adhere to it, just create this
virtue for you.
Now the sutra called the restraint of the patimaka. Then a certain bhikkhu approached the blessed
one and asked him,
Pranable sir, it would be good if the blessed one would teach me the dhamma in brief so that
having heard the dhamma from the blessed one, I might dwell alone with drawn, diligent,
ardent and residue. And the Buddha replies, in that case bhikkhu purify the very beginning
of wholesome states. And what is the beginning of wholesome states? Here bhikkhu dwell restrained
by the restraint of the patimaka, accomplished in good conduct and proper resort seeing danger
in the slightest faults, having undertaken a training rule, straining them. When bhikkhu
dwell restrained in such a way, seeing the danger in the slightest faults, then based
upon that virtue, established upon virtue, you should develop the four establishments
of mindfulness, the satipatana, not before that.
So you're doing your mindfulness before you even accomplish yourself in precepts, it's
just putting the cart in front of a horse and expecting it to move.
There's no way to have that type of discernment.
No, no, but it's the same, that's why it's mindfulness samadhi, it's the same development,
same thing that comes on the basis of established, uncompromised, unbroken virtue.
So, how do you uncompromise your virtue by overly defining your rules and sort of proliferating
aspects or by simply not accepting any action that your mind offers you out of greed, aversion,
delusion.
And you know that.
Am I acting out of hindrances? Am I acting out of doubt? Am I acting out of restlessness?
Am I acting out of sensuality, anger, sloth and laziness? It's unwholesome. If I don't
do it, I am accomplished in virtue. So you will be abandoning hindrances as well, which
is what samadhi is.
And not acting out of unwholesome states, I mean we speak about it so often. And all
of that is contained between you and your relationship with your own virtue or lack of
it.
When I say lack of virtue, it doesn't mean you don't keep the precepts, it means you
keep them, but in that external celibar parama sense and you are not internally becoming
accomplished in those rules. In other words, you are not internalizing criteria for unwholesome
that you are avoiding, you are just adhering to the definition through your intellect,
tradition, authority and so on.
That if you don't have the clarity that comes from accomplishment or in virtue, you cannot
be mindful of the body. No, no, your mindfulness will be external in the same sense your responsibility
for your virtues is external. So when you do mindfulness, you will be doing it on the
level of objects of your senses, which is not mindfulness, will be like a duty. That's
exactly what meditation technique is for people. It's often taken in a sense of another external
duty that I must do and it's certainly always taken on the level of sense objects, observations,
nematiles and whatever else, movements, motions, it's never taken as the internal recitations,
recitations, mantras, visualizations, yeah, every and that's why it's taken there because
there's no basis for mindfulness, no sufficient basis for mindfulness to be taken on the right
peripheral, sufficiently peripheral context. So what happens then is just you take it where
your mind is and your mind is out there on the external things because you want to avoid
doubt and all these things. You're just adhering to external things with a sense of duty.
Sila Vata Paramasa. And then your meditation becomes on the level of that Sila Vata Paramasa.
And then your discernment is on that level. In other words, it's not a discernment. You're
discerning things more on the level of sense objects without having the right context,
the right basis for it. All because you have an larger self to become accomplished in that
virtue correctly, you haven't taken it up, you haven't accepted the weight of responsibility
for it and endured it.
