So you've been seeing many times that the problem
is that we are affected in the first place, in other words we are we are
anger is possible, lust is possible, we can get confused.
Suffering is possible for us.
So the goal is to not be affected in the first place, not to do something on a counter.
Well, that's the kind of fundamental difference that I often try to highlight.
The practice of dharma is not supposed to just help you with things, help you with things that bother you, help you deal with them.
It's basically supposed to approach your liability to it, to things that bother you.
So it doesn't manage your suffering, it removes possibility for you to suffer in the first place.
So that's a personal goal for your practice, it should be I don't want to be affected by things to begin with.
Not I want to have a perfect management technique that will always help me deal with whatever suffering has arisen.
See, that's the problem already, suffering has arisen.
You might be very skilled in dealing with it, but you're not skilled in not having it arise in the first place.
And that's what should be your issue.
So that's why even in the Buddha would often describe his teaching, the freeze you from suffering brings cessation of being.
The ending of bhava, the ending of all these things becoming for you, manifesting and during that you have to manage them later.
Means they're not anymore, being deceased, they're gone.
So that is the goal of the dhamma, cessation of being, not management of things that are for you here and now.
The cessation of suffering, cessation of greed, diversion, delusion.
So I can get angry, I can get angry, but then I can find out some sort of technique to manage my anger.
Yeah, when you're going to angry think these thoughts.
When you're angry do this, when you're angry do that.
That's how you start.
You need to be, well you need to want to be free from anger to begin with.
And then inevitably your first effort will be directed at how to manage and subdue the anger.
But you mustn't confuse that for the actual practice of the dhamma, which if done rightly will uproot the anger.
And then it's nothing for you to manage.
No burden for you to have to do or deal with and if you don't do it you will then suffer.
No, there is nothing to be dealt with because nothing affects you to begin with.
You say it's not the dhamma, that management is not the dhamma.
Exactly, it's like the approximation of the dhamma.
It's not the direct way, one way only, the way the Buddha would describe the dhamma would always only result in purification of being.
Removing all the unwholesomeness and making bhava cease.
Management doesn't do that.
Only that direct insight into what approves suffering, what is uprooting the greed, what is uprooting the aversion and delusion.
So what is the dhamma?
Is that direct path for uprooting, nor to the management.
So you are kind of responsible for whether things you're doing, whether you've taken them as dhamma,
whether you've taken them for the purpose of uprooting the issues, not dealing with it, but making yourself not liable to them even in the future.
Or have you taken the dhamma instruction as a means of helping yourself deal with these things.
So it's determined by you, by your attitude, whether that instruction will be taken as the dhamma or as management.
That's the difference I'm pointing at.
You know, like you can do satipatana, which is the dhamma, the way the Buddha described, but you can do it for the reasons of managing your suffering,
not for the reasons of uprooting it.
Which means you are responsible for whether it's management or it's the dhamma.
And yeah, that's why the dhamma arises in those who see.
You can tell the dhamma directly that the Buddha would teach the dhamma to somebody, but he wouldn't be the dhamma for them because they're not understanding it.
So there is no rising of dhamma in their experience.
But he is the thing that Buddha said, but they're not understanding it.
So the dhamma can only arise on that individual level.
There's dhamma, the way, knowing the knowledge of the way.
The knowledge of the way of uprooting things, basically, that's what it is.
The knowledge of overcoming liability to suffering once and for all, not just the knowledge of how to manage it skillfully when it arises.
See, you can look and see, I am subject to suffering.
I will. Things can go wrong.
Well, exactly. It's really on that level of I will.
I will experience this. I am liable to this.
That's, we often say that, that's what we say, the wise man will reflect.
The young man who leaves the home, I am prey to suffering.
It's not necessarily suffering now, but the suffering will catch me at some point.
It's inevitable.
And you should have the, like, mental, basically, clarity enough, mental capacity sufficiently enough to start seeing that as the actual root of the problem.
Now, the fact that you might, like, well, I suffer now, I don't suffer tomorrow, or whatever, the fact that I will at some point, it's inevitable, and that's the true problem.
Even if I spend the rest of my life skillfully avoiding all the major suffering, the fact is, it will still have to, I am still liable to it.
I still have to make the effort to avoid it. That's already the issue.
The divine messenger, you know, the Buddha was neither sick nor old nor dying when he saw sick, aging, dead person.
So you see that, ah, this is directly present in my experience as the inherent liability.
And that's where the issue is.
And that's where the difference in practice of management and the practice of uprooting, let's call it that way, is basically in recognizing, like, okay, so there is no lust in my experience here and now.
There is no greed in my experience here and now, there is no delusion in my experience here and, okay, I find that.
No, but now, as the Buddha would say, okay, so you ask yourself further.
It's good that those things are not present here and now, but your next question should now be, so is it possible for no reason lost to arise later on?
Now it's not here, but can it be here tomorrow? Oh, have I addressed that?
Here and now, not wait for tomorrow to address it.
And that's literally the crossroads between, are you heading in the direction of uprooting it?
Or are you heading in the direction of management?
And most people go down the path of management, as in, I'll deal with it when it arises, failing to understand that liability to future lust is a reason issue now.
You don't have to wait for it to arise. Is there a chance for non-manifested lust, non-manifested aversion to manifest in my experience later?
If you're not sure, means that is a chance. If you know for sure, there you go, you confirm that.
So there is a chance that these things will arise. That's the issue for me now when those things are not present.
Anger is a possibility for anger, is a problem. No, not in the future. It is now a problem.
And that's the whole, that's like the, what differentiates your practice from, are you aiming at the uprooting, or are you just aiming at the skillful management?
And you heard that yourself before, it's very common attitude of, oh well, you know, most of the time you are not lustful, most of the time you're not angry.
So see, you're doing fine. If most of the time you're not angry means anger is still your liability, your possibility.
Which means you're as angry. Like, yeah, you're not acting out of that anger as often as others, but that's just because you learn some management of your anger.
You're certainly not uprooting anything if you have the attitude that most of the time these things don't arise for me.
Yeah, but could they arise at any time? Yes, that's the issue you're not seeing and that's why you're not uprooting anything.
So you see that there is a problem because you see and know that there is the possibility of anger.
So you have to train your mind to start seeing these possibilities as actually present because they are.
So you can think to yourself, I can manage my lust or my anger quite well. I'm ready to skill with that.
I know all these different techniques, psychological methods to employ so that I can ease that anger, ease that lust and become again.
If your way out of suffering is skillful managing it, you need suffering to arise first.
So management requires suffering in order to manage it. So management cannot free you from that suffering.
You can only deal with it once it has arisen. And most people, that's the kind of problem that sort of relatively subtle, I suppose, is people, as I said,
natural tendencies to turn towards management first. I'll take it, get rid of the problem, do it skillfully, whatever else.
But there is this kind of conflating that occurs then, or rather confusion.
So through your management of suffering, you experience like less dukkha.
And then at the same time, you kind of start basically tacitly assuming, hoping that all you have to do is manage your suffering long enough,
and then somehow magically, liability to dukkha will disappear.
So all you have to do is adhere to this management and skillful avoiding and so on.
And there's already implicit, as I said, wishful thinking, that implies that you hope for suffering will then just poof eventually.
From your management, it will just evaporate. But it won't. That's the point.
The only way that suffering will evaporate is if you evaporate it.
If you understand the core, pull the thorn out.
It won't come out by itself. So uproot it.
So if you keep managing it with a hope that somehow it will disappear on the level of that, I am still liable to it,
means your practice revolves around wishful thinking.
There is no direct insight. This is what to be done for freedom from suffering.
Because everybody wants to be fully free from suffering, which means everybody wants to not even be liable to discomfort and displeasure.
So I start doing meta, meta, meta, meta, meta, every day, every day. And I stay calm. I don't get angry.
But I have to keep doing meta because I can. So your calmness then is dependent upon the factor of you sustaining your effort towards whatever you perceive meta contemplation to be,
which means if sometimes circumstances change, you get sick or something happens or too many things happen, you don't have enough time.
So you cannot engage to that necessary extent of your meta contemplation, means you're back within anger.
So you haven't really uprooted anger. You just suppressed it with a certain practices.
And as I said, it's not inherently wrong to do that, to begin with.
But it's inherently wrong to adopt a view that doing that approves things somehow magically.
The only way to approve things is to directly see what uprooting is. And I just described it what it is.
It's recognizing that liability, the possibility of anger, possibility of ill will, possibility of sensuality, possibility of delusion, possibility of dukkha as the dukkha right now.
Not to wait for it when it occurs.
So you can see that possibility, see that possibility. So what do you do? How do you uproot this possibility that tomorrow you might suffer?
Well, it's sustaining that. So can you sustain that if you're not keeping the precepts?
Can you sustain that elevated state of mind that recognizes liability to dukkha without the actual dukkha being present there?
If you're drinking, smoking, running around, distracting yourself, engaging in entertainment, no, impossible.
So that the noble eightfold path, that's how you do it. Right livelihood, right view first, first of all.
See, if your view is still regards management as the way out of suffering, you will not stay on the level of weight.
It's the possibility of suffering that's the problem there must be dealt, not the actual suffering when it arises.
So again, how do I deal with that? How do you deal with what? The possibility.
But noble eightfold path. So right view, knowing that that's where the issue is, not looking elsewhere, right intentions,
not entertaining, not delighting, not giving in to create a version of delusion through your speech, through your body, in your thoughts.
So on every front, you need to build yourself up in order to be able to sustain that recognition of liability here and now it's what the issue is.
If you ask yourself, how do I deal with the possibility of future suffering here and now, you're basically asking how do I manage it?
How do I manage this possibility?
Well, that's what you're implying, because you want to deal with it now.
You deal with it properly, not give in to the view of management by realizing that you have no right to resist it.
So you have to be careful when you start recognizing, the liability of suffering is the problem for me.
You have to be careful to now not give in to the attitude of wanting to manage that.
So I want it to end. I want that possibility to be gone.
So then you really have to understand where the dukkha is there.
Is the possibility in itself dukkha?
Is that possibility of future discomfort, future disagreeable things?
Is that in itself dukkha?
The idea.
Yeah, the thought of it. Is that the dukkha?
No.
So what's the dukkha then?
I would say it's that unpleasant feeling. It's the displeasure that is there when I have that idea.
Right.
So I feel uncomfortable with the fact that in the future, I will suffer pain, which I'm suffering presently because of that.
So then the next question you should ask yourself, is the unpleasant feeling then that you have when you think those thoughts?
Is that the dukkha in itself?
No, no.
Because it is what it is, that pain.
Well, yeah.
The problem is I don't want it there.
So what is then the dukkha?
I mean, I would say, okay, it's the craving to get rid of it.
Okay. So how is that manifested? What is that?
Practically in your experience.
Resist.
So, yeah.
I resisted.
So that's something that is entitled of, I should not have this.
So you realize you suffer because you resist discomfort even before the discomfort comes your way.
See, you resist the thought of the possibility of discomfort here and now, and that's why here and now you experience dukkha.
That's why the Buddha didn't say, Vedana is the cause of dukkha.
He didn't say feelings are the cause of suffering.
He said, Tanha, craving is the cause of suffering, craving in regard to what you feel.
So you have such and such feeling when you have such and such thought, present, future or past, but it's your implicit attitude towards the feeling of either craving towards it or away from it.
That's why that experience is dukkha.
And see, you would have not seen that if you haven't forced yourself to discern the level of that possibility of dukkha is dukkha right now.
You wouldn't have seen that if you were just fully bent on managing the dukkha as it arises or managing the dukkha before it arises.
Yeah, so that's what I mean, even when people recognize sometimes the future dukkha, liability to the future dukkha, they can even take that as something to manage.
So I'll do this, I'll do this, so these things will not happen to me.
Which carries the implicit view that dukkha is in those actual things or in your actual feelings, and you don't see that it's in your attitude towards these things.
Right here, right now, always present, exactly, always present.
The relationship between dukkha and dukkha between craving and suffering is always present, always simultaneously present.
Presence of suffering means presence of tana.
Presence of tana means presence of suffering.
So to the extent that tana is present, to that extent suffering is felt.
Or to the extent that suffering is felt, to that extent, attitude of tana is present.
There is no delay, or like a few seconds later, dukkha comes as a result of your craving.
Now, presence of suffering means presence of craving, presence of suffering.
So that's why if you were to remove the presence of craving, there is no suffering amidst things that used to cause you to suffer so much.
And that's why liberation is visible and possible from suffering here and now.
I mean, you need to start seeing as dukkha the liability to suffering, not actually wait for the actual suffering and then manage it.
Because if you don't see that liability, then you're complacent.
If you're not seeing the liability, means you are not seeing where your craving is.
No, you're not seeing dukkha. You're not seeing dukkha.
You need to see the dukkha first in order to see the cause of dukkha. You can't just be dealing with the dukkha without understanding what dukkha is.
That's what I said. I am teaching suffering and I'm teaching freedom.
I'm teaching only two things suffering and freedom from it. That's it.
So if you don't see that possibility of future discomfort is already dukkha now, means you're not seeing the nature of dukkha to begin with.
So does matter what happens to you, you will not see it with the correct set of eyes, so to speak.
And if you're not seeing what the dukkha is here and now, already, you're not going to see your craving.
Because as I said, to the extent that the dukkha is felt, to that extent, craving is present.
But you're not seeing the felt dukkha, thus how can you see that, which determines it, the actual craving.
So that's what I mean. Management, looking to deal with it over there without seeing where the actual dukkha is.
Because you give in to that need to manage it and remove the pain, as opposed to understand it.
It's inherently bound in the wrong view. It's inherently bound in the wrong direction.
It's just like a way you could reflect. Why are you entitled to manage pain?
Have you had to say, well, on the nature of that dukkha, even the actual dukkha or the future dukkha?
Just reflect. Have you had to say, and it's arising?
Can you prevent circumstances from becoming disagreeable at any point in the future?
Is that even conceivable, actually? It's just a pure fantasy.
Fantasy rooted in this complete misconceiving of the problem.
Problem is in these things happening to me. Problem is not in me implicitly resisting the idea of these things happening to me.
So how do you stop resisting the pain?
How do you then stop craving or rather welcoming the pleasure?
How do you remove craving? Well, we just outlined it.
By not trying to manage it, by seeing it here and now already.
And then by sensory strength, because you cannot possibly be welcoming pleasure
and then just dealing with the unpleasant experiences when they arise.
You can't just selectively pick and choose which cravings you want.
If there is any form of craving present, means liability to suffering is present.
So you have to abandon craving for pleasure, inasmuch you have to abandon craving against pain.
So pain comes, pleasure comes. You are not saying it's arising.
So why do you then constantly entertain the attitude of, I want this, I don't want this.
I write to want this, I write to not want this.
Why do you go after one and try to avoid the other one?
Where is your attitude rooted? Why are you doing it?
Because if pleasure and pain is felt, it's a pressure, you feel the pain.
So it's painful to not do it. So you do it because you want to avoid pain.
Because it's pressure and pain is pressure.
So you don't know how to deal with Duka, thus you try to get rid of Duka.
That's basically the nutshell of every management.
And that's why it's inherently wrong.
Even if you're doing the Dama, all the Buddha's instructions, but you're taking them as management,
means you still entertain the same attitude because of which you suffer in the first place.
Which is, I can handle this, I want to get rid of it.
Which is the attitude of craving.
So how can you then withstand the pressure?
But can you withstand the pressure if even your physical behavior is not kept in check?
Can you withstand mental pressure then? Impossible.
If your verbal behavior is not kept in check, like the outposts of lust and anger
through your physical action, through your verbal action, if you don't keep a lid on that,
can you possibly withstand things mentally? Not a chance.
And how do you do that by doing it? Like how do you become stronger?
Well, by exposing yourself to things, they will make you stronger, by training.
I said that many times, like even when I first read that I saw it as I was a bit puzzled,
but it keeps talking about he trains himself, thus.
A monk, skilled monk trains himself, thus.
Because you know, you had all these notions about enlightenment, and then someone's like,
what is there to train? You know, you do things and then enlightenment happens to you.
No, you train the strength out of which wisdom comes, which is what enlightenment is.
So that's where sensory strain is not optional.
That's where virtue is not, you know, I can do it for a while.
It's a necessary basis that has to remain throughout.
So you will be able to withstand the pressure by not giving into pressure.
By not giving into pressure, you get to outline what the actual problem is.
Your liability to future pressure, to future discomfort, is already the problem right here right now.
And you see that now, because you haven't just blindly gave in to managing of the pressure in order to get rid of the pressure.
Manage the stress in order to get rid of the stress.
Practice the dama so you don't get this particular stress anymore.
I recognize that there's a possibility of suffering.
And I see that suffering right now.
It's suffering because I resist the displeasure here and now in regard to the possibility.
It's suffering because I resist.
So I don't resist that discomfort here and now.
But I must have that, I must still have that idea.
I don't have to keep on thinking about that there's a possibility of me suffering tomorrow.
No, they will come and go.
So whatever, basically I have to look at whatever I'm feeling right now.
Yeah, because that's where the resistance occurs.
That's where craving is. It's where you feel.
Yeah, I can put the possibility of suffering. I put that aside.
Because now I know what the problem is here and now.
Sure, sure.
I've come to that.
You start right? You contemplate the possibility of suffering when you forget what the problem is here and now.
Or were you not seeing it?
Yeah, like Sari Puta, just ask himself. I think it was Sari Puta.
What am I liable to anything to any suffering?
Yeah, it was something like that.
Is there any suffering that can arise?
Yeah, is there any suffering that hasn't, that the possibility of suffering hasn't been addressed, so to speak?
Yeah.
And he's like, no, I don't see any. Okay.
He still doesn't decide, okay, I'm done now.
No, you remain with that vigilant attitude.
So you don't miss, okay? I'll check in every now and then and see if something has changed.
If possibility for lust, aversion, delusion, possibility for pressure,
possibility for central pull, possibility for suffering,
has that arisen now? Not the actual suffering, but the possibility for it being,
oh, look, yeah, now I see it, yeah, it could, it's possible.
There you go, that's your issue, right there and then.
So what do you do?
Well, you don't lose the sight of it to begin with.
But feeling.
Yeah.
You don't welcome it if it's the possibility towards pleasure and sensuality,
and you don't resist it if it's the possibility towards pain and discomfort.
Is there anything that, is it a possibility for me?
Indulging in welcoming.
Indulging is too coarse already.
It's a pleasure in the future.
Exactly.
So it's on the level of the possibility of pleasure or possibility of pain,
which means on the level of welcoming or kind of shying away from itself.
So I think if someone brings me a pizza tomorrow,
I love the taste of pizza, will I, will I welcome a taste of vegetable taste?
Will I get lost?
And you will know that, if you're looking at things rightly,
you will know that already now.
You'll know.
Oh, I can't wait.
Even if you are perfectly restrained and don't express your joy over the particular type of food brought to you,
you already internally, you know what it is.
And so that, that's the problem.
And but there's the work.
And that's the work, except that's where the issue is.
And people would, okay, so I will tell them never to bring that thing again,
because I like it too much.
It's like, well, you can do that as a way of like, if you really can't deal with things,
okay, put it aside.
But that's really masking the issue.
The issue is not the pizza or whatever people have brought to you.
The issue is you're unable to restrain yourself.
You're unable to have mind free from greed.
So now you're just trying to remove things that make you greedy.
You're unable to not be wanting pleasure.
You are unable to not welcome that pressure of that pleasure.
You're unable, which means that's where you will remain liable.
You can spend 100 years of that management.
You will never approve your centrality.
So you feel the pressure of pain, the resistance against it, and you stop.
Well, exactly. You don't try to get rid of it.
You don't try to psychologize, manage, explain, prevent things from arising.
Obviously, if something obviously unwholesome, like when that man came and wanted to offer
his daughter to the Buddha, and he said, no, don't even bother.
I will not accept that.
Like certain things cannot be done rightly, such as sexual intercourse and so on.
But there are things that there's nothing wrong in eating food,
whether it stays still or not.
But it's wrong in eating it with central reasons.
And you eat your food with central reasons when you are unable to not be overwhelmed
by that pressure towards accepting pleasure.
I would say when you practice in regard to the food, not like you stop eating.
No, you eat mindfully.
You maintain the reasons for your eating clearly, and you eat one of those reasons at present,
reasons for health, sustaining the body, so that you can practice further,
not the reasons of your beautification, chasing the taste, and so on.
But if you just think, if I avoid the food, I don't have to deal with these reasons,
well, you're sorely mistaken.
You're just covering up the basis of your centrality.
So even if you just eat horrible stuff all the time,
because you don't want to experience any sensual joy of the taste,
you still need to look at these reasons and keep the vigilant eye on them,
because that's where sensuality is rooted, not in the actual taste.
So am I welcoming?
Am I delighting?
Am I accepting this elation on account of central prospect
that is pleasing to me?
That's the issue.
My acceptance, not seeing the danger in it.
Not that's the issue.
Not the issue.
Oh, I must not have this thing.
Arise for me at all.
Call people, tell them never to bring their food, never to connect.
You'll never see anything, you'll never hear anything, you'll never taste anything, agree.
And you're not, you're misconceiving where the issue is.
And you maintain the issue.
Well, you remain fully within it.
That's why you're not stepping outside of central domains.
There might be someone who comes along.
And that's where the asceticism, the art must form, like giants,
the perfect practice of obsessive hingsa, non-violence,
not eating, not harming, anything.
It's utterly misguided, because it's fully misprojected.
They don't see where the issue really is.
You know, avoiding food, any food, just eating every third day
and to the point of in the end, you die on a kind of starvation.
And that's like the ultimate goal of a giant.
Yet you realise you fully remain bound by the central domain.
Never a step closer to escape it.
It was the giants that said that, by avoiding things,
then you diminish the pressure.
But where's the Buddhist ways?
What? Because it's not always the same things.
You don't always have one attitude towards all things.
If you were to only have the attitude of accepting everything,
every type of feeling, every type of perception,
then giants would have been right.
All you need to do is avoid it, because you always accept it.
But that's not the case.
You're not accepting the unpleasurable feelings.
You are actually trying to get rid of them.
You're only accepting certain things.
But then you're resisting some other things.
And so it's not a blanket rule.
Always avoid, because it's not a blanket experience.
That's always the same.
That's why what you do, whether you avoid,
or whether you have to basically endure,
is determined by how you feel.
And you don't even feel there's always the same in regard to the same things.
Sometimes one same food might make you happy.
Sometimes it might make you unpleasant.
Sometimes it might make you indifferent,
which means you have three different types of attitude
that will then exhibit the craving.
But if you always avoid everything,
you're ignoring two-thirds of that picture,
and that's why you will remain ignorant.
So how can you then know when to reject and when to accept?
Like when you're resisting,
you're seriously the future prospect of suffering.
Should you be rejecting that even more?
No.
You need to accept that these possibilities are there present
and you have no say in it.
That's how you can then stop resisting it continuously
and thus you approve the suffering.
Or should you then accept the prospect of future pleasure
that you had already delighted in it?
No, you must reject it.
You must contemplate the danger in it.
So how do you know what you do?
Well, by learning how to be properly mindful
of an enduring feeling,
because that's where things converge.
That's where things are rooted.
You can't just take a set of behavior.
I always do this when it's this and this when it's that.
No.
First, you just need to remain mindful
of what's the present enduring feeling
and you will know then what attitude is there.
If the present enduring feeling is of pleasure
and agreeability means you have the attitude of welcoming it.
By default.
But you must.
So that's what you reject.
You reject your welcoming of this central pleasure.
You don't blame, like giants,
the actual object of your central pleasure.
So you will know what attitude is there
by correctly understanding what present feeling is there.
That's the root of the problem.
It's always present.
The root of the problem is always present.
It's not in the past.
It will not be in the future.
That's the root of the problem.
Exactly.
And the root of that present root is basically your attitude
towards the present enduring feeling.
So it's whatever suffering will arise in the future is always.
That's the gateway.
It's within that.
That doesn't disappear when the suffering arise.
That remains.
It's vessel, so to speak.
It's framework, as I say.
Because no matter future discomfort and suffering can affect you
unless you're holding on to that vessel of rejecting it.
But the vessel of rejection, basically, of any discomfort.
That's your mindset.
So anything that comes of discomfort on nature is going to make you suffer
because of your attitude of not wanting it.
You remove the attitude of that,
the attitude of not wanting that discomfort.
Not necessarily seeking it out,
but certainly not trying to get rid of it when it's there.
Exactly.
When it's circumstantial rise, which inevitably will,
then you're not cultivating that.
Your attitude is mindset of resistance,
which means your craving is now truly diminishing.
And same.
You will diminish your craving when you don't cultivate your
attitude is mindset of welcoming, as the Buddha would say,
delighting and detaining the notions of current and future pleasure.
Like, why are you, like, when you ask yourself,
am I liable to future essential desire?
Oh, yes. Why?
Because here and now, I'm still holding it there.
I'm still welcoming the prospect of it.
Here and now, I haven't uprooted it.
Not, I haven't dealt with it rightly once it has arisen.
No.
It's on the level of that possible future sensuality is only possible
because right here, right now, I am still valuing it.
I'm still haven't seen the thorough danger in it.
I'm still on some level delighting in it.
And that delight is to be dealt with here and now,
not in the future when that thing arises.
