There are many different questions. I don't know if we will get to them all today. I don't
know how much time you have. One question which I had asked on YouTube, maybe we could
start with that was about the term peripheral awareness. Basically, I read your essay about
it and I listened to a couple of videos. Basically, whenever you start talking about peripheral
or awareness, I would get a little bit confused because the word is not, it really can begin
to push it different ways. I was trying to understand exactly what it means, the peripheral
awareness. What I had asked on when I wrote on YouTube, I basically tried to describe how
I was understanding it so that you could tell me if it was correct or not. How I gathered
from it was that it's basically like, let's say if I'm sitting here talking to you on
the chair, an example you talk about having peripheral awareness with the reference point
of sitting. For example, I'm sitting here talking to you on the chair, formulating my
question and figuring out how to put it well. I should have a background awareness of the
fact that I'm sitting, for example. Maybe before we get too far into it, it's not necessarily
like you must have it in a sense of, I must make this effort and maintain this background.
You just need to recognize it as that which is already there. That's in those talks I
think I was, when I was describing peripheral awareness, I ended up talking about the knowledge
which is already peripheral in its nature. You already know you're seated, you already
know the door is closed, you already know you're talking to me. All these things are
already there. You are not attending them. You don't need to keep telling to yourself
while you're talking to me that you are seated, you are seated. But if I were to ask in the
middle of your sentence about something different, are you seated? You would immediately have
the answer. Which means that knowledge is already there without not being required to
be directly attended. So it's peripheral. Peripheral awareness can be basically the recognition
of that which you already know there which is a basis of your situation. So it's subtle
because often yes, people would kind of hear it and then immediately say, Peripheral awareness
is something I must do in this peripheral manner. But then they end up still in the same sense
trying to attend to it. But as I said, instead of attending to or I'm seated, I'm seated,
you just want to recognize the level of that knowledge and not keep having to answer it
to yourself because you already know the answer. Okay, so then, but what would be the difference
between like somebody who is practicing, practicing peripheral awareness or kind of working on
it is something you still have to work on. If I understand well, it's like not because
otherwise what I'm trying to understand is the difference between somebody practicing
mindfulness as you explain. And somebody who's like a normal person just going about their
daily life who also knows that the door is closed, who also knows that they're seated,
who also knows that they're yeah, but they're not that they're talking, they're not aware
of it. They know if they ask the question, but they don't have the awareness of their
knowledge, persisting is a base of their situation. Because if they did, they would experience
this passion. They would not be able to engage with central desires and ill will yet they
do, which means they don't have the right knowledge. Like, yes, if they stop and ask
themselves, they will know it. So it's not knowing that the door is closed or you're
seated, but it's being aware of the knowledge that the door is closed and you're seated
while you're engaged with other things. So it's really the relationship between the peripheral
and what you're choosing to attend to. And that's exactly why the mindfulness is that
framework, the container. And that's exactly why it needs developing. Now, just, yeah,
I know I'm seated, full stop, I completed the mindfulness. No, is the relationship between
your knowledge that you're seated and what you choose to do, intend, speak, think while
you're seated on the basis of that situation.
Okay, so you say it's okay, it's the relationship between the knowledge that you are seated and
what you choose to do on the basis of that situation. So now, okay, so you're aware that
you're seated, you know that you're aware of that you know that you are seated in the
sense. And like, my other kind of question was, so this, like this, like knowing being
aware of being seated is basically, you're basically aware of a sensation, right? Like
being aware that the of your position, like you don't need sensations for the knowledge
of your seated position, you have the knowledge, which is why you know what sensations to look
for. So the knowledge comes first, not the sensations. It's usually that expectation of
your attention to find something more substantial that needs to discern these sensations, they
would then be a representation of the seated, but you already know you're seated. You can
answer to me, are you seated? You could give me immediate answer before you tap into your
sensations of seated body, which is always secondary to the knowledge that you are already
seated. So that's how many it's actually shot like that, then just attending to the sensations
of, I don't know, touching the chair or something like that. It's the knowledge of it.
But I know that I'm seated because I chose to sit down, like I chose to sit down and
now I am now I'm seated. Yeah. And you don't need sensations to confirm to you what you
already know that you're seated. They're completely redundant actually, how your body feels and
how the chair where it presses you and stuff, it's completely redundant. You're seated and
you said to yourself, you know you're seated because you chose to sit down. There were
no sensations involved in your choice of sitting down. It was like, Oh, I want to sit down.
I need to sit down. It's better to sit down. All these other intentions. Yet when we speak
about it, people think, Oh, since it, why would you bring the sensations into it then?
When you realize had nothing to do with neither your decision, nor the knowledge of being
seated. I mean, I know why because everybody does that. That's like the natural kind of
how must look closer to the sensations or something as if somehow that analysis more
of you know, you see, if you want to analyze the nature of being seated, as exactly as
you did kind of spontaneously, our intention to sit down brought me here, which means your
intention to sit down is still present there with you. It wasn't half an hour ago when
you said it remains enduring while you're seated. Because if your intention to be seated changes,
you will stand up or lay down. So and that's another thing. Yeah, in the relationship with
those other in the same peripheral awareness talks is that knowing the intention why you
want it like, Oh, I'm doing this. And then knowing that while you're doing it, your intention
is persistently kind of it's enduring. There is a binding factor. You're not like going
to moment to moment awareness. No, the knowledge of what you want to do is the uniform factor
of all of your particular little actions. So the knowledge of what you're going to do
is basically the framework of your current action. If you want to be mindful of it.
Okay, so if I try to kind of put it in in language for under six years old, it would
be like, yeah, basically, I know that I know that I'm sitting down based on the fact that
I had the intention to sit down. And it's like, and that I and that I still choose to keep
sitting down. This is like the main, this is the first thing that comes. Like, or the.
Because I agree, I agree that sensation, like, don't need to take that further in a sense.
What do I do now? Like with this knowledge of being seated, you just need to start using
it as a basis. They will take away from being self centered with your point of view towards
what you attend to and see whatever you choose to attend to on a basis of this seated situation.
That's where the Buddha would say, like, when he was still the bodhisattva in the forest walking
in doing a walking meditation or something, and he would say, if there is like an unwholesome
state with a rise in my mind, fear or something, I would not change my position until I first
dispel the fear. Then if I happened to be seated, and then there was lust or fear, again, I
wouldn't stand up until I dispelled the fear. So he wouldn't change the basis of his situation
because it would mean he acted out of lust or fear or anything unwholesome. So he used
the basis of situation as an enduring framework, container for whatever present phenomenon
has been kind of besetting his mind. But without the factorial basis of your situation, such
as your body, your body posture, your current enduring feeling, anything from such a patana,
you will be engaged with a current state of mind through your point of view. And that's
exactly what that self-centeredness and conceit involves. It's not like the people are choose
to be conceited. They just don't know. They have no other reference point between them
and what they attend to. So the knowledge I'm describing, it's not like, oh, I need
to clarify this knowledge more in a sense of, get more details about it, although that
can be helpful for somebody. It's more like, now that I'm clear, now that I know it, I
need to stop attending that and use it as a basis for what I'm attending. And that's
what I mean, the relationship between the two, that then eventually you develop that
sufficiently enough, your sense of self, the self-centered point of view that chooses
to attend and thinks it's the receptor of these things that come through senses will
be made redundant. And then it's just, as the Buddha would say inside the patana, oh,
he knows there is the presence of the last full mind, as the last full mind, there is
a non-last full mind, as a non-last full mind, elated mind, depressed mind, doesn't
matter. It's not like, I am depressed, I am lustful, I'm hateful or something like that.
Yeah, yeah, this, this I understand, I mean, I, I agree, the, that's,
Yeah, I think many people get this part, many people get this part from satipatana. But
what I'm trying to describe is the only way to get it is to establish the proper basis
of mindfulness of the level of the knowledge, not on the level of kind of sensations or
something that I choose, I choose to attend as representative of the seated position,
which means still puts you in the center, the driving seat.
Yeah, and yeah, this I, this I agree to, but like, I agree, like always, because always
the mind, like always people are just, like, looking at what they see, what they hear,
what you, what you think, what you are, like, what I, what I want, what I don't want, what
I feel, what I, so this, like, if you look always outside, this I see, that if you're
just looking outside at the objects of my, my senses or object of my, like, outside
of my attention, then this is no good, because it's just I am, I am seeing this, I am hearing
this, I am automatically, it's this, what I would add there is that even the notion
of sensations is also another thing that's outside, outside to self-centeredness. Yeah.
So the only thing that's behind the only thing that's not outside of your point of view,
not like the where your attention can land is what's peripheral to it, which is the level
of the knowledge. You cannot make that into physical sense, like, because that becomes
something you can send. So even your body posture is to be known as such, not attended
and felt as often describing contemporary sort of Buddhist teachings and so on. Yeah.
So that's the, that's the difference. Yeah. I mean, yeah, like I understand, I, I agree
with you about sensations and that was why I was like, kind of doubtful about this, kind
of doubtful about the idea of, of it, if it consists of sensations, then, then it's not
correct because you're just paying, yeah, you're just paying attention to something
that's like theory outside of you. Yeah. Yeah. There's no wisdom that can arise from there.
And wisdom is like, as you say, it has to be on the level of what knows the thing that
the thing that knows, like the wisdom comes from the, from basically completely bypassing
and extinguishing that self-centered point of view. When, as I said, your sense of self
is made redundant. Like you just know, the body is as such, feelings as as such, thoughts
are as, are as such and so on. So there is no like, oh, I am choosing this, there is
choice present. And then you choose whether to attend to it further or not based on the
wisdom you developed. Yeah. And that's when somebody who is not free from that self-centered
is they cannot choose to cease to be self-centered because that would be a self-centered choice
they make. So they need to undermine it and hardy undermine it by digging under. And what's
basically under from where you're standing, it can be called peripheral, not direct in
front of you. So that's why I use that word basically just to give the idea to people.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. So if I just to back up a bit, like now, yeah, you know, you kind
of came back to it anyway. When you use the word peripheral, if I understand well, you
can correct me. It's basically, is it meaning that it's not something that's not an object
of your senses? It's not an object like what is what is not the direct object of of your
attention? Yeah, exactly. Because if it becomes a direct object of your attention, then something
else is peripheral because now what you're attending can only be direct as opposed to
peripheral. Yeah. So it's not an object of an object of your senses. So all like, so it's
not a sensation, not that you can't be just paying attention to sensations or sounds or
or whatever. And when you said example that you have to be kind of develop the awareness
on the level of knowledge, then this is on the level of like being aware of the almost
being aware of the attention itself, like being kind of well, being being aware of your
attention, what's peripheral to that which you're attending? And that's exactly the
definition of the only someone has a car, the only so meaning the womb of your attention,
not the attention. So in the same sense, and I cannot see itself, but you know that there
is an eye present for as long as there is a sight present. So it's already, it's already
the peripheral relationship even within your own senses, sense organs and sense objects.
So that's the definition of the only someone's secret is basically not like knowing where
my attention came from in the past or something analyzing the roots of my attention. No, it's
not presently the basis for my current attention, a basis that cannot be attended. Because if
I attend to it, something else is the basis for my current attending of that which I thought
was the basis. So if you keep trying to kind of attend it, it's like a dog chasing its
own tail to the extent you try to reach you to that extent the tail escapes you.
Okay, so you were saying about, you mentioned about actions as well, about like the intention
of your actions, how you can be like have the peripheral, like yeah, keep this as the basis
of mindfulness essentially. And this I found is interesting because I, because it's sort
of easier for, it's easier to understand than like a body posture. Because this is like
if you intend, like if you intend to do something, if you have an intention of even just moving
or speaking or something, then like to be, to keep the awareness of attention I can understand
this easier as a, as a base mindfulness, because also because it's something that like is really
directly linked to removing, removing KLSA because your intentions are driven either
driven usually by, by greed, by like a version or by, by, by a MOHA by not knowing if I understand
well. So then like being aware of the intention. But what I was less clear about was how you
were kind of talking of it as a sort of like a general background of your like general
background of your experience or something. Maybe I'm not remembering it well. But as
I go from what I can observe an intention is always something quite, it's more like
a particular, it's quite specific, like you, let's see, let's see, let's see, right now
I have the intention of speaking this word. Yeah, yeah, no, that is a choice what you're
talking about, which is more particular. But choice is basically intentional intention.
But the only reason you can make the choice is because you have general intentions as
possibilities that you can choose, because you can choose to speak or be silent. You
can choose to say one thing or the other. And then it becomes particular making of the
choice. But that choice can only be made because these intentions are already given as possibilities.
So that's the difference between like intention and intentional intention, which is what we
commonly call a choice. That's the difference between like the relationship between like
the intentional mind, the chitta, and then chetana, which is the actual intention of
the choice that you make on account of the mind, they gave you this option. So the last
full mind will lean your choices towards choices of lust and so on. Now, if you have wisdom on
account towards the whole situation, that's how you can then choose to say no, which is
your first step basically sense restraint and so on. But the intention I'm talking about,
it's not on the level of when you intentionally intend to it and then make a choice. That is
particular. And the only reason it can be particular is because generally the intentions are given
and waiting to, because you can also change your choice as well. You make a choice to do
something, then you change your mind. You still have the other options there.
Yeah. And those options are not particular. They don't sit in front of you.
So when you say intention, you mean like basically the all the possibilities of what you can do.
Pretty much exactly. Yeah. Thoughts, images, damas on the level of possibilities. That's exactly what
what intentions are in that sense. And that's why you then can choose to intend
with a certain leaning of your mind and so on. And that's when it becomes a choice.
So that's you are not responsible for the intentions for their arising,
but you're responsible for intentionally intending them on the basis of the last
a version of delusion. And it's those choices that then will make those intentions arise more
or less for you. So person who keeps acting out of lust will have more options of lust
presented to him. That's like even for the first six, seven years, Mara was harassing the Buddha,
hoping he will take a bite until he realized, no, his mind will never turn to this. And then
he left him alone. And in many other similes that was described the experience of an Arahant.
Now that these intentions suddenly the recognitions of last a version will kind of poof just disappear
in a second. But Arahant's intentional intention of those things he's incapable of. So eventually
these things will completely cool down. And then even as these options that he's not responsible
for, it will cease to appear like the flies will cease to come to the basically, I don't know,
rotting meat if there is no more rotting meat left lying around. The flies will fly around a bit
longer hoping for it or crows. Oh yeah, that was a similar in the suitors. It was a crow. Like Mara
was like a crow seeking what can it bite? What can it pick on? But the Buddha provided nothing
and then the crow just left him. So these intentionalities have just evaporated eventually
because they haven't been maintained and fed through these intentional intentions of last,
a version, distraction and so on.
Okay, so there's a point here. I'm struggling to get a hold of the gears.
Okay, so in the beginning you, okay, so we have the level of like all the possibilities of what
you can do. So but this is like for everybody at any time there's always the possibility of,
let's say, like of the, I don't know, let's just say you have an itch. Everybody can decide whether
to scratch the itch or not to scratch the itch. Okay, there's the both both possibilities there.
Then you have the, then you have the like automatic decision or choice is not really
automatic. You've decided to scratch the itch mostly for most people unless you are aware enough
of the itch, like if you're aware enough beforehand to decide not to or to have the choice that
you see in there. And you couldn't continue.
Well, yeah, no, that's exactly it. You have the two choices because you don't have any other
knowledge. That's exactly why knowledge results in liberation. But if you say the gained knowledge
that you shouldn't scratch, now you have an option to not scratch and you have a reason as an option
to choose to, which you didn't have before. But if you develop the knowledge sufficiently enough
and stop scratching, you will heal. So knowledge resulted in liberation. So it's not that these
choices are universally present for everyone. I mean, of course, scratching nature or not scratching
nature. But what we are talking about is the choices on the level of your mind for greed or
non-greed, a version or non-aversion, delusion, not delusion. And now choices of greed have like
myriad ways of manifesting itself and so on. But all of them share the common nature of being
rooted in greed, which is what you keep persistingly choosing. So then if you start abstaining from
that and learn that maybe greed is not good, suddenly you do recognize the choice of sensory
strength, like sensory strength, for example, an average man today in the world, he doesn't even
have that as an option. It's inconceivable for a person to be sensory strained by their own will.
It needs to be some sort of religious practice, some sort of faith-based determination in their
mind. They cannot fathom it in any other way. But say you start actually understanding the
nature of your condition and start seeing for yourself that scratching the itch is fundamentally
making things worse. Now you have an option that you directly see as valuable, which you did not
have before. So intentions change on the basis of your knowledge and basis of your other intent
because you chose to learn this, you chose to listen to the Dharma, you chose to read the suttas.
So you are responsible now for cultivation of new intentions later on. And that's exactly what
was said, even Nibbana being asankata, being undetermined, it's actually determined, determined by what,
by one's decision to practice and develop it back in the day, not immediately, but you know,
when he left the household life and so on. So the choices he made towards Nibbana determine
the Nibbana eventually resulted in it.
Yeah, so no, yeah, this I understand.
So what I was trying to do, I was trying to become clear on the, okay, so now you say,
like for everybody, they don't even realize, example, because they don't, I would not say,
yeah, most people you don't, they don't think about or you don't realize that you have a choice
in regard to, again, regard to what you do, because most of the time, you're like, you're just
automatically like, by default, you're driven by a reader version delusion from what I can observe.
Well, it becomes, it becomes by default, because people choose to avoid responsibility
for their own choices and their own actions. That's why we always go back to that as well,
as a prerequisite for the right view for the right mindfulness, like a pre prerequisite is
accepting responsibility for basically your choices, your intentions, your actions for everything you
feel, even if it's not your fault, you need to accept responsibility first, because that will
prevent you then from fueling ignoring the nature of your own choice that you do choose to make
as such. So, acting out of greedy version delusion becomes automatic, because you are choosing oblivion
of towards your responsibility, you're ignoring it, you're turning a blind eye that then results
in automatically following desires or scratching, and that's why then people say, oh, it's not my
fault, I just have this, it's true, it's not your fault that your desire is automatic, but it is
your fault that you ignore responsibility in regard to that, which is what makes that desire
look automatic. And the reason people ignore that responsibility is it's unpleasant, and they don't
have enough knowledge with them, they haven't been told enough, they haven't understood sufficiently
that actually, despite being unpleasant, accepting responsibility is beneficial for me.
So, they need to learn, without knowledge, they will not do it. So, it's a vicious circle
of automatically perpetuating that, which makes their desire automatic.
Yeah, I mean, what I was, I was referring to as well, like the fact that,
let's say somebody is in a conversation, and now the, like one of the, one of the people starts,
I'm just going to give an example, one of the people sort of points out to something, the other
one has done wrong, like, let's say you, like you have acted irresponsibly or something like that,
and now, like, what happens for most people in this kind of situation, because speaking is
especially difficult, like, they will automatically just want to defend themselves, like automatically
you just will reply without any, without considering or without thinking about it, without, like,
even if you know, like, even if you want to practice or you know that, like, I am not supposed to,
I don't want to react in this way, I don't want to, like, act defensively, or I don't want to,
like, I don't want to behave in this way, I don't want to behave like in this sort of angry
reaction, but the reaction, like, the mind makes the reaction before you are able to,
like, practice restraint in it, and then people only realize afterwards, like, you become, then
you have regret, oh no, I said that, I shouldn't have said that, so, like, in this sense, the,
like, the choice of react, the choice of replying in a defensive way or in a kind of angry way,
this is something that, because at that, at that moment, there was no awareness there,
there was no, like, block, there was nothing to, like, to stop it from arriving, like, the mind
makes this by, by itself, and then you realize afterwards, so, so what I was kind of wondering
is, is, like, is this what you were, I was wondering if this is part of what you were referring to
in the sense, like, the difference between, like, you have all the, you have the option of
not replying in that way, of not reacting defensively, you do have the, like, you do have the choice,
but because the, because the mind is sort of, like, it just, it just reacts automatically
without you, without you being aware, without you knowing, and then afterwards, you realize,
well, yeah, not quite, at the point you did, it's automatic at the time, and as I said,
the reason why it's automatic is because you maintain the basis for that, so you want to see
where the problem is, in the same sense, you know, having a fever, when you catch a virus,
it's automatic, but what if you learn how to prevent catching a virus, you won't get a fever,
so having a mind move and respond, even if you don't want to and you can't catch it in time,
means, do you are doing something or maintaining something on some level that then makes that
mind overwhelmed, and the very first thing it's in the last talk we posted now, it comes down to that,
whether your value is towards management or towards uprooting, so if you think, you shouldn't be
saying this, you shouldn't be doing that, that's on the level of management, with as I said, everybody
starts like that, but really, you want to see, I don't want to be affected, whether I choose to
speak or not, I should not be affected emotionally, but what was said to me, and for that, you are
responsible, and then you realize, that is the basis for my mind automatically blurting things
out that I shouldn't have said, I was affected, so how can then I not be affected, then I don't
have to worry what mind will say, because it won't be rooted in self-defense, gratuitous, or something
like that, which means he won't be on wholesome, that's why Arhan doesn't need to worry about his
actions in a sense, because he knows whatever he chooses to do will not be rooted in greed,
aversion, or distraction, or delusion, so in that sense, it's not automatic, that's what I mean,
mind blurting stuff, it's automatic, but you, through your other choices, when you're not affected,
arm maintaining the basis, which then makes the mind blur things out verbally, or for some people
physically as well. Okay, so now kind of jumping many, jumping many subjects, but yeah, no, I
actually listened to your last talk yesterday, and I agree with the point that it's not enough
to just become angry, let's say, when somebody says something that points out something you have
done wrong or to want to defend, but even if you're kind of able to restrain yourself, not to say
it is not good enough, like it's not good enough to avoid saying this, I mean, it would still be
better than saying the words and then having regret and having conflict. And that's another
thing, by the way, if the mind automatically blurred stuff out means you haven't developed
restraint sufficiently, doesn't matter how pressing, whatever you want to defend yourself against
the choice of not acting out by body by speech by mind always remains there, the fact that you
acted out, the mind said something or thought something means you need to develop more, you need
to be able to hold it more without actually letting in the more you become aware of that lack, so to
speak, the more you'll be able to develop it. But if you think not you specifically, but if a person
might think, oh, the speech happened automatically means you will not look for an upgrade there,
because you don't feel responsible for it now, see, you said, Oh, it's automatic, wasn't my fault,
my fault is later, or avoiding my fault is later what I do. No, it was automatic, but there is a
certain basis for mind acting automatically, basis that lacks the restraint. So you can even,
doesn't matter how automatic it is, you can always choose no. And that's the restraint. And then the
wisdom can come out of it. So even even in a common sense of sensory strain, there is still
something to be done there. Not necessarily, I must discern this basis and why am I affected in the
first place? Yeah, that's all on the level of the person and developing wisdom. But even if you
don't get any of them, you can still keep your mouth shut, literally. So if you blurt out means
your verbal restraint hasn't been strengthened enough. Yeah. Yeah. So I mean, like, it's still
I agree, it's still your fault. Like if you still, if you, if you kind of blurt out words automatically,
then it's still your, you're still your fault. But it's your fault kind of in the sense that you
were not, you were not mindful enough, and you were not restrained enough at that point.
Yeah. And from the point of view of one who practices, that's a big fault. Without fixing that fault,
there is no progress. So it's not like, okay, I mean, sure, it's not as bad as somebody who is
no interesting practice, but you don't want to be comparing to that side of things. So restraint
has not been developed. Thus wisdom cannot arise in regard to speech, in regard to being affected
by what other, what other people say. I cannot approach my emotional kind of vulnerability,
so to speak, until I fix this first. So that's, I mean, it's not automatic at all, in a sense.
Like it's just a symptom for which you're not directly responsible in the sense of you are not
generating the symptom, but you're fully responsible for, for the reason of that symptom. Yeah. Yeah.
I mean, yeah, when I say automatic, I kind of, it's a way of, of, of saying that like, even though,
like you don't, yeah, it's the way of saying that you kind of don't deliberately sort of decide,
now I will speak these words, because you know that you're not supposed to say them.
Yeah. That's why we need to, we need to actually start kind of fabricating and investing effort
to develop responsibility for things that don't necessarily feel their fault, because that's the
only way to then actually approach things correctly. And, but especially in regard to speech, it's,
like it's a, it's an interesting point, because, like this, what, because we, we, we, we have said
and we both, like we both agree that you, if you are, if you are speaking things without considering
and then you then have regret later, then it's, it means that you're doing something wrong,
means that you haven't developed enough, enough restraint in regard to your speech and you don't
have enough mindfulness, but like the kind of mindfulness that needs, this is the point I'm
trying to come to actually is that the type of mindfulness that needs to be there in order to
be able to practice restraint in regards to the words that you're saying, obviously it can't be
just about playing with like the sensation of sitting on the chair or being like mindful of the,
like something outside object of your senses, but like so from, from my understanding like if you
need to be aware, basically you need to be aware of your own mind, like the, of how, like the,
of the fact that these, like you're hearing these words and now what happens in your mind as you
hear them, like do you have the, does the mind react with anger or not, and now like if it went
and, and now like even if it's reacting in anger, then if you are aware at that point,
then you're able to stop this, but if you are not aware, then you're not able to stop it,
or if you were kind of aware, if you were more aware, then you can like be able to
not allow the mind to react in anger. So how would you then, how would you then go about being aware,
being aware about being aware of your mind? How would you do that then? How would you then not,
not lose awareness of your mind? So then you don't say something out of carelessness.
Well, if somebody is, but you need to just maintain awareness of your mind, essentially,
something that you need to practice. No, but they say I don't know what awareness of the mind is,
or in other words, it might mean one thing for me, another thing for you. So yeah, how can I understand
what the awareness of the mind is for you? How can I practically do it? I want to be aware of
the mind the way you're describing. How can I go about and do that? Well, it's like not to look
at what you see and what you hear, not that somebody is telling the, is saying these words,
but at that point, you have to maintain awareness of who hears, like what, what is hearing the,
like the, at that place or at that point, like who is, who is hearing, who is speaking,
who is, who is acting or who is, who is listening, like to be, like if you were aware at that point,
now you know, like to know, to know at the point where the words are, where the sound example is
meeting the mind, like because when somebody is saying words about it. So hold on, hold on,
hold on. So if it's about the point where the sound meets the mind, it is about things you see
in here, because you started by saying it's not about things you see in here. But if that's what
you're paying attention, then it is about what you're hearing. No, but what I mean is not to the,
not paying attention to the sound itself, but paying attention to how it is formed in the mind,
like how has it hurt the, like for example, I mean, I cannot give many examples from myself,
like this. Well, it's hurt as an insult. For example, I heard an insult.
So I was aware of hearing the sound entering my ears and everything else, but it was an insult.
So how do I be aware that some not insulted to begin with?
But the point is that it's an insult only if you're like, it's your mind that takes it as an insult,
like I am insulted. But the mind took it already. So how do I not be affected by that? Because everybody
starts by already being insulted, affected, greedy, adverse and so on. So how do I then,
not be affected by the insulted mind? Do I analyze what I heard? What do I do? No. How do I be aware
of it? So I'm not affected over it with by it. Sorry.
I'm not affected by it. It doesn't matter. So let me just get your question straight. So how do you
be aware of the aware of this in the way that you're not affected by this? Yeah, by the mind,
it's insulted. Because what you were describing to me sounds like I'm hoping.
Well, that's that's what I'm trying to get to. Like what you described to, it's like I'm
basically trying to set up this practice whereby I will hopefully not get insulted
by analyzing sounds or or paying attention to who hears or introducing these other questions.
They will sort of maybe deflate the insult. But the fact is,
the people start with an unenlightened mind with a mind that's not free from greedy version
delusion, which means insult will be first, lust will be first, aversion will be first.
So how am I not affected in the first place? Not how will I manage once I'm affected?
How will I, whoever affected now, learn to not be affected by this?
Yeah, so first of all, I mean, I'm not really talking about analyzing the sound or something
like that. This is just on the level of like awareness. But if you're what you're asking is,
so like if you're already affected, then first of all, if you're even if you're already affected,
then at least if you have the if you are aware enough at the at the point of that, like if you're
aware of like being insulted, that the mind that you're insulted, or that you that like this,
this feeling of of being insulted is there, then at least you can decide not to speak based on that.
So like at least then if you were aware of that point of being being insulted, then you can
decide not to speak based on that. But you have to be aware of like of what's going on in your mind
of the like feeling of being insulted that that is there in order to then practice restraint or not.
Okay. But you can also like, but if you like if you under first of there's many
there's different points. How do you not become affected in the in the furthest place? Like I
would say partly, partly is based on kind of developing understanding, like understanding of the
the I mean, this is more specific, but so why then would I need to ask myself, why then would I
need to ask myself who hears and who's offended and what did I hear and what sound and why why is
that relevant? No, but when I say like ask who hears, it's not it's not as a kind of question
that you kind of ask yourself or something to to analyze. It's just as a way of sort of pointing
to the place to be aware like to to. But what's the place? Not looking outside at the sound.
But why would that be relevant? So the sound did offend me. The sound was the problem.
No, the sound is not the problem. The sound is the sound. This is the point like if you.
Then it doesn't really matter. Like what I heard and who heard, it doesn't really, it's irrelevant.
What matters is I'm affected here and now doesn't matter why and who said what and to what extent.
I don't need to pay attention to the words even in that sense. So the problem is not in those things.
So how would you. So then how am I aware of where the problem is? Because when I ask you do this,
you describe the sound and the question and so on. I'm surely meant different, but doesn't matter.
The point is even if you say, oh, you don't really ask a question, you just look for the place.
Why? What place? Is it the place that I'm affected? It means, well, I am already affected. I already
know that. I don't need to look for the place. So what is the problem? Let me put it like that.
What is the problem in being affected? What is the problem in an insult? Is it the words?
Is it the person? Is it the attitude? Even is it my conceit? No, what is the problem there and then
while I'm insulted? What is the problem by being insulted? The fact is that you feel insulted
already. What is the problem of an insult? Sometimes a person can say something to you and you're
not insulted. Sometimes they say the same thing and now you're insulted. What's the difference between
the two? The difference is because example, you can hear the same insulting words from in a movie
example or in another context and now you will not get insulted because it's not because I'm not
insulted. The same context. Not relating to two different contexts which would be two different
experiences, the same experience, same context, same person, same occasion, same habit. Once I
feel insulted, another occasion I don't, which is quite possible. What would be the difference
between the two? It's not the words I hear. It's not even the mindset. I do recognize, look,
he wants to insult me like yesterday. So what would be the difference then between the two?
They want constitutes an issue. Exactly, pain, suffering, unpleasantness that you want to get rid
of. So you want to be mindful, you want to be aware, no need for sensations, no sound,
no self questioning of the psychological nature. All of that will be done inevitably in the beginning
but you need to maintain the sight like the eyes on the prize which is, no fundamentally,
the only reason insult, torture, anything is a problem is because emotionally it's uncomfortable
and I'm habitually resisting it. That's why I suffer. Not because of the words, not because who
hear the words, who is offended, it's because when the experience of disagreeable arises and
yours and this five aggregates, they're describing against it. And without the knowledge of that,
it will be impossible. A person will never arrive at it. It doesn't matter how much management,
how much meditation techniques and repostinars in the colloquial sense of what they do because
it's all revolves around being affected already and missing the point, which means for even to
the slightest degree, you miss that the point of insult is being unpleasant and you resist that,
to that extent you will, at least implicitly assume it's the words, it's the person, it's
something I've done, I wasn't mindful enough, I didn't do this, I didn't have my meditation,
I made all this, I will not do this mistake, all of that is secondary to the fact that no,
presence of craving means presence of suffering, not presence of unpleasant words, unpleasant
actions, unpleasant thoughts. So how would you be aware of that? You realize, oh, by recognizing
where the problem is. So mindfulness, knowledge, go hand in hand, you will not be able to be mindful
of these things unless you start discerning them and you will not be able to discern them,
unless you actually hear about them in that sense. That's why the two factors for the
arising of the right view is the right instruction and the right, the only someone in the car,
the proper type of like knowing what the attention is, so to speak. Because if you just hear my
actual words without a peripheral context of your own experience to which these words apply,
you have no yawning so basis. So you're just attending, literally taking word for word
in mantras and so on, like what people commonly do. All these are just said that, as I said this
and so on. I read the sutas, I study sutas, but peripherally, you want to discern the
context with this applies to you here and now this very moment, which is why this very moment,
the roots of suffering are being maintained by you. And that's exactly how you get even the
confidence that you're not even afraid of what you will hear in the future, what people will do
to you in the future, because the place where the pain is has been uprooted, which is the craving.
So it doesn't really matter what comes this way. The basis of suffering is gone, because suffering
was never in things that were coming through your ears, eyes and so on, not even through your thoughts,
so to speak. It was in your own ignorance of basic, your own attitude towards your own
presently enduring feeling here and now.
Yeah, at this point about, yeah, at this point of, if I can paraphrase generally,
yeah, that you suffer, but mainly what makes it suffering, what makes something suffering,
is because you, because of craving, like what makes anything suffering is because that you
like want to get rid of it or you want, or want something, you are already doing it.
It's not, I want to get rid of it. I am already trying to get rid of it. That's why I already
suffer. It's not on the level of choosing or not choosing. You're already, if you're already
suffering, if you're already affected, you're already getting rid of it. Yeah, and the point
where there was one point that you mentioned, there's like again, just again in regard to the
same example, like hearing, hearing insulting words, there's a, because there's, now you mentioned
unpleasant feeling arises, has arisen that you were trying to get rid of and this is what makes
this painful or suffering, if I got it right. But for somebody who's got rid of craving
and got rid of their self-centered point of view, let's say, how does the unpleasant feeling of
being insulted or right is? How can that be possible? The insult, the disagreeability of it,
but they're not resisting it. What's disagreeing about this? Well, the offensive attitude,
the threatening attitude of the person, perception of that, perception is disagreeable of it.
Like same when the Buddha said, sometimes a monk asking for instruction, he gives him
destruction and he goes and does the opposite. Buddha sees him doing the opposite, not being
restrained and he said, the target is disagreed with that. He experienced a disagreeable feeling,
but that disagreeable feeling cannot overwhelm his mind. In other words, there is no craving in
regard to disagreeability of that perception. It's not that this person who is free from
craving an other hand has no concept anymore of people's behavior or this is threatening,
this is agreeable, this is disagreeable. No, he cannot be affected by it, but agreeability
and disagreeability is still there. And that's the difference.
In the sense that, yes, like something is okay, it's
shouting you, I'm shouting, I'm punching my face, I'm threatening to hate you, I'm calling you names,
all of that is significant, you perceive that, you know what that means. Arran does not lose
the meaning of all these things, but he loses being emotionally overwhelmed by it.
Yeah, you can judge example the behavior that behaves, you can see, okay, if you start to
shout at me and to threaten me and every day, I can see, okay, it's actor out of anger, it's
immoral, it's immoral behavior, but why would it be disagreeable for me?
Like the example or hearing and insulting words is there's no reason for it to be disagreeable for
me? Well, there is no reason to not be disagreeable either, you are not in a choice of how things arise
for you, you just find things agreeing or disagreeing, cold, hot, that's why they would have compared
the words and abuse of others to should be endured like the way you endure the elements, you endure
instincts biting you. Yeah, so you trying why is that disagreeable is basically overstepping
into the domain of nature of perception and trying to why is it like that doesn't matter why.
Only the only thing you can know and you are responsible for is are you resisting the disagreeable?
Are you fearing it? Are you trying to get rid of it? Are you trying to prevent it out of fear and
so on? And are you trying to prolong the agreeable? Are you existentially dependent upon agreeable?
Why is there disagreeable and agreeable? It's basically like asking why the aggregate of
Sankara is there? Why the aggregate of perception is there? That's kind of a meaningless question
because the question is the result of the aggregate being there.
They are not sure because in regard to the like disagreeable things that arise from, because let's
say as let's talk about I mean a sound can be or like a sound can be something that like physically
hearing a sound can be sort of physically painful for the ear like I say a really loud sound.
So it's disagreeable? Physically disagreeable. You don't suffer you don't fear it but it's
disagreeable in itself. So asking why is it disagreeable it's like asking why is there a sound?
It's on the same footing. But what I was going to say is that the like disagreeable from from
hearing words is a bit different because that's not something physical. It's only on the level of
the how the mind how the mind takes it like if it's a because hearing you can hear the same words
based like as I said like you can hear it in itself. You can hear it in itself in a movie.
Right well it's not a word. So it's the context that you're still hearing if you don't hear the
movie the mind will have no context of impersonal insult. So whichever way your mind takes it
it did it boils down to the sound you heard. Again that's why the Buddha said he a skillful
man can do his heat called insect bites abuse of others and so on. It's on the level of elements
besetting you because there is meaning even in meaningless sound so to speak meaning to the point
of disagreeability. That's what it means screeching sound. Agreeability I don't it's nothing specific
there are no words to it but it's still in its very essence it suits or it disturbs that's it
and same with the speech. Obviously speech gets more elaborate because now there's all layers of
meaning of the words in the language and designations but fundamentally none of they would exist if
somebody didn't actually say it. If you didn't hear it so the sound is there still as a basis
and fundamentally doesn't matter how much how much it means positively or negatively what the
person said fundamentally it all remains bound with the sound that you heard the word so it's
agreeable or disagreeable fundamentally pleasing or displeasing but just the point I was trying
to make maybe maybe it doesn't matter but the but that the disagreeable is not in the sound it's
not because of the because of the nature of the sound it's only because of the nature of the meaning
if it's if it's about words that's where you're suffering. Yeah that's the difference between
suffering on account to disagreeable and disagreeable I'm talking about and the disagreeable I'm
talking about is in the sound that you heard that's that's as far as basically your responsibility goes.
You can now over analyze and say it's because they meant this or they meant that but fundamentally
none of that would be even there if you haven't heard it you would not be relevant it would be
like a movie you didn't watch. Yeah and it's quite important what I'm saying is because
if you do divorce agreeability and disagreeability from the perception through your senses it enables
you then to go through the analysis of the sound not in an abstract sense but like who where it came
from separate the meaning which kind of basically feels almost as if you are dealing with the problem
of it but you're not the problem is not that sound is agreeable or disagreeable or neither
maybe it's a neutral sound the problem is that agreeability disagreeability neutrality means basis
for craving for you within you but if you if you are focusing on the relationship between the sound
and disagreeability and why is it disagreeable or why it shouldn't be and the meaning and so on
means you're not dealing with the problem is so it doesn't matter why it's disagreeable what matters
is is they're craving against the disagreeable experiences a whole of somebody saying mean words
to me doesn't matter the individual syllables the words the exit none of that is relevant
who they are is irrelevant why did they say this why do they want to hurt me absolutely
relevant what really that is the experience as a whole is disagreeable and that's what I'm
resisting if I stop resisting the disagreeability the actual violence cannot harm me anymore
so how do you stop what do you mean by resist stopping to resist the disagreeable of it how
first see first you need to see exactly so if you think disagreeability is not in the perception
you have misconceived it if you think disagreeability is equals you're suffering you have misconceived
it so you need to see disagreeability of the experience as a whole as a reason phenomena
that you did not necessarily create and you have no say any directly but you are subjected to it
and that's why sensory strength needs to be done beforehand sensory strength that prevents
one's mind from blaming the sound or the person they said or attacking them implying they are
the cause for my suffering so you stop you start restraining then you still try to analyze the
disagreeable why did I say this why did I react like that maybe I shouldn't do it wasn't mindful
enough all of that revolves around the fact that you are resisting the disagreeable which means
you're not seeing it you're not seeing it for what it is enduring there but if you start actually if
you stop investing effort in managing the disagreeable and like no disagreeability is present doesn't
matter on account of what and then refrain for as long as it takes from jumping into the management
of the disagreeable then you get to see that all you have is disagreeable disagreeability or
agreeability and your attitude towards it that's the that's basically the core that's the only
relevance here that's the gateway for any suffering for any last for any version they will then be
manifested are you welcoming the agreeable are you resisting the disagreeable as a preemptive
attitude pretty much as a view and the only way you can see the view in regard to agreeability
or disagreeability is to first start seeing agreeability or disagreeability correctly
that's where the Buddha himself said all i'm teaching is suffering like correctly people don't
even know what suffering is all i'm teaching is dukkha and freedom from so i'm actually teaching
you dukkha like the Buddha would say means people like can suffer the utmost the greatest misfortune
and still completely have no idea what actual dukkha is so dukkha and freedom from dukkha
agreeability and freedom from agreeability disagreeability freedom from disagreeability
but it needs to be seen for what it is
because even when you have the view that but disagreeability doesn't feel like it's in the words
all of that you have pretty much developed inferred maintained on account of experiencing the disagreeable
words first and then your mind your thinking took you into explaining that it's not in the words
and so on because it was first and it remained first so does he doesn't matter as i said whether
it's in this this point is experiences a whole of certain words in this particular instance
felt disagreeable and it was a problem for me and that's why you gave into all these reflections
basically revolving around trying to together it trying to free yourself from it
yeah but i agree like this is not this is useless like to kind of analyze after the event is like
you're too late like that you already you already was disagreeable was already a problem and now
you say i was only because of the was only because it was only because of the meaning it was not because
of the words yeah oh that is useless um yeah this uh say agreed
and then um it's
like a bear related point what if
because we now we're talking about agreeable and disagreeable but in
and and like feeling feeling suffering on account of that but what i
like i would say that also like yeah you can talk about it on that level but i mean
there is the kind of additional problem let's say in getting angry about something is
one is that it's like one is that it's disagreeable but i think most people like as a normal person
when you get angry you don't even kind of notice that it's disagreeable because you're so focusing
on the object of it the anger itself you don't see it as disagreeable so i mean the problem with
anger is is is is more that it's in like on wholesome that it's wrong that it's that it's not
that it's not good but so like from that point of view
but like you need to learn to you need to learn to not be it's not get angry in the first place okay
like if you kind of if you are getting if you are getting angry already
then like if you're getting angry and then kind of saying it's not if you if you allow yourself
to get angry and to continue to get angry and to speak out of anger like in your aim yeah your
aim can be to not get angry in the first place but i would say you kind of have to start by first
not allowing yourself to not not allowing the anger to continue well that's why i say you need
to start restraining yourself first you're not going to see things on the level of your mind if
you if your physical and verbal actions are not restrained beforehand so you have to stop acting
out of anger you have to stop acting out of lust with a goal of not being affected by it in the
first place so if you're still affected by the first place not acting well restrained but
affected in the first place you still have a massive problem there that's the route yeah
and it doesn't matter if you're getting affected as much or i'm not getting affected as much no
nature of being affected is something i'm still susceptible to thus it's still the massive problem
because often what happens when people get into practice they they start cultivating the environment
that suits them which is fine but then they begin they start to depend on that environment whereby
you you will have a protective environment well you might be the senior monk nobody will be
challenging you offending you questioning you nothing really to poke you around so you don't
really have this anger arising anymore because now you're basically to lower the land everybody's
your servant so to speak so but that doesn't mean you dealt with it so that's why the buddha
would say so you then ask yourself okay i'm not experiencing any kind of anger but
candy and a reason anger arise for me if you have no idea means yes you got your answer
so and that should be regarded as the root of the problem not the fact that most of my time
i'm not lastful most of my time i'm not angry that's because of the circumstances or because
you're in our hand which one is it so if person is honest they'll know the answer
but no often often it's regarded as oh dama helps me i don't get angry as much
are you still liable to anger yes that's not the dama that's just your management
on account of how you took dama to be to be but dama actually will approach it
it means you will be incapable of anger yeah they reminded me of that story with the mistress
vida hika i think another one the the maid servant the mistress was uh supposed to be so
patient and so kind and so she was testing her yeah so so i mean that's yeah that's
i mean i was uh it's it's like i said but it's a good point it's true like this i mean i was wondering
even um because i'm because i'm not involved and i don't i'm not or or none and like we don't
we don't live like that so um so it's kind of interesting kind of interesting way of practicing
here that you like you have kind of plenty of opportunity to see this to see that like anger
can arise or like the that these things can arise you're not in sort of a position where you
uh when you're never being confronted by anybody so in one sense i would say that's
almost a useful thing because you have to kind of be confronted by the by the fact that's
in a way exactly i think if it can be it can be beneficial for people but that's again that's
another place for peripheral awareness whichever whichever we want to call it would be handy
which would actually like result in knowledge if people's practice is about current sensations
in present moment present moment present moment presently i've no lost presently i've no ill will
that's it that's my concern present moment no future present moment should be a concern
on a reason last can it arise oh yeah that's another present moment that i'm obviously
ignoring because i'm so absorbed in present sensations and and present breathing and presently
being here and now you know judgment free or whatever else you know people say apologize
okay that's fine great so environment is suitable you made some effort are you liable to lust
are you liable to aversion oh and if you are you are presently liable ironically enough
so you're so absorbed in the present moment that you don't see your present liability
to the very things you you think you're overcoming
and that's like see the possibility of future lust it's not present there so you cannot attend
to it that's exactly why people have people who are used to this kind of practice of just
just what's in front have problem understanding while you only summon a sicare is the way we describe
it have you know it cannot grasp peripheral because if the moment they think it they make it in the
front but it is there a possibility of future lust it's exactly that see it's an intention
that persists there because you're not free from lust arabhan has no possibility of future lust
no intentions of lust gone uprooted because he has made the effort on that on that right level
understood it okay but yeah this was a this was a point in the video yesterday that I
wanted to ask about anyway so like when you say the possibility of future like the yeah the
possibility of future lust or future sexual desire or future anger
like yeah it's it is there as a possibility and it is a problem which means it's a possibility
of future lust means its current liability and that's a problem
they basically means that you haven't uprooted this like as long as it's there because you
have not uprooted this yeah you haven't actually yeah you haven't fixed the problem so everything
else that's around you like oh most of the time I'm not angry most of the time I don't last fool
that's all circumstantial and should be regarded as such for as long as you don't approach it
that's the true freedom but many people by just focusing on what's in front what's in front is
that I don't get lustful don't get angry oh I must be free then or something but until you get
lustful or angry then you quickly deal with it and then you say well most of the time I'm fine
but if you're honest you would see being liable to it that's where the problem is rooted so am I
free from that or not if not means most of the time circumstances suit me and they don't challenge
me if that would change my mind would be overwhelmed by those things that I basically think I uprooted
and you don't want to wait for that to tell you to happen because it will be too late to deal with it
yeah I mean like yeah I see that it's like it's it's a useful it can be like a useful thing to like
ask yourself or to put this kind of pressure on yourself to see okay even if I'm not getting
angry right now I can get angry or if it's necessary it's not it's not optional it's complete it's
absolutely it's the only gateway towards writer-proofing everything else is management even if all you do
is read the suitors and practice unless it's done through this gateway of liability to Duka
one way or the other it's going to be on the level of management
okay but the question I had was about like why do you because I mean is Duka not present
anyway now in your current experience if you are like because it's it's present is it not present
anyway like why do you need to think about the liability for it in the future because that's
what Duka is Duka uneasiness this is that's what it is liability I mean the divine messenger the
Buddha wasn't sick wasn't old and wasn't dead but he recognizes inevitability so if he just focused
on whether it was present he wouldn't have seen those things as divine messages so you need even
wisdom to recognize where the problem is let alone to begin dealing with it
then the sense that yeah the fact that you're liable to suffering yeah the fact that you're
liable to suffering if you recognize the liability currently it's currently unpleasant so actually
Duka is present for everyone who's not free from it from that liability is just that it's not seen
hence the Buddha teaches Duka first and then freedom from it most people won't even see that
liability is a problem I mean yeah like pay when you pay attention to the idea that you are
that you're subject to suffering this isn't unpleasant or this can be this can be unpleasant
that is it just unpleasant but if you don't pay attention to the idea of the fact that
you can that you will suffer that you will get old that you will get sick that you will die
you don't pay attention to that then you don't feel that is suffering yeah that's where you need
to start paying attention to it because it is your reality it's unavoidable you can choose to not
pay attention to things that are avoidable but it's unwise thing to not pay attention to things that
are unavoidable the divine messages I mean yeah if you don't pay attention to side sound smell
taste touches they bother you they'll stop bothering you the fact is you can be bothered
and you will be bothered first so you choosing to not pay attention is you choosing to ignore the
problem I mean if you if you don't accept that you are ill you'll think you're healthy yeah
and that is pretty much the common world sort of way of dealing with a problem just ignore it just
ignore the problem it's not there don't pay attention to it absorb yourself either in the
australis or souls of feet or where the chair touches you or something don't pay attention to
your current liability of your existence because it's just too overwhelming
and what do you mean exactly by like paying attention it should I mean you have the idea that
I will suffer in the future okay so like then and I can remember you um inside of the video
yesterday like you don't need to keep you don't need to keep paying attention to the idea and
keep paying attention to that idea if if the mind is liable to like just ignore the problem
but once you become aware of the problem you start feeling that concern that dukkha
then you don't have to keep paying attention to it in the same sense of oh am I like because now
you feel it that you are liable and you already know so what you feel becomes pretty much the
exemplification of your knowledge of your situation and that's exactly what I said if a person does
feel dukkha correctly there are only two possible outcomes madness or noble search there is no
third possibility if dukkha is seen correctly mind will either go mad if he cannot deal with it
or if he has enough composure it will seek how do I approve this and most people never even allow
that choice to manifest even the ones they commit to the practice of dama and so on
it's all down on the level of management of the current disturbances not on the level of
uprooting my fundamental liability sickness aging death
so i'm just trying to um
like yeah so in the beginning you from from the beginning you need to recognize that you're
that that's yet that you that you need to recognize that yeah this is like to get the
to start practicing from the beginning with the right attitude it should be this like you have
to know that you are sick in order to see the doctor to like otherwise yeah if you if you don't
know that you are sick if you don't feel that you are sick you don't go to you don't go
don't go to see the doctor
um but like what is still not that clear for me is like the
uh
because then i mean they then you start to then you have to start to practice right so
like what i'm trying to understand what the practice is what is the what the practice is
is yeah well that's if you start living if you start living within the recognition of your
pretty much perpetual liability to do cut pray to suffering as everybody would say
and not give into like psychologizing managing trying to explain to yourself so you don't suffer
as much you will then abandon that which is basically liable to that to that suffering so
you would then and that's where this this all the other talks we did on the sense of ownership
and nature seeing correctly that's where it applies not on the level of explanation of the
world is often oh yes the modern science has said everything is impermanent the Buddha has said
see modern science and down my it's the same no first you need to feel that existential liability
and then recognize that on nature and then give up that because of which you suffer
give up your self-centeredness give up the dependence on pleasure all the upadhanas the Buddha talk
about but only on the basis of that framework of i am liable and this needs to be uprooted
because otherwise if you take it you don't take it on that basis sorry if you don't take it on that
basis it will be taken through the attitude of management of the disturbance of suffering
not the uprooting of the liability to it
yeah i mean like what i was talking about was more about the
and like i i like i agree like you're trying to just managing and not kind of
not have things that are disagreeable to you is uh like not to be not to
yeah not not to like suffer so much or not to it's it's no use i mean example that like you will
always just try to get away from the things that are disagreeable but you won't like uh you won't
try to remove the things that are agreeable so the management of restoring to is not it's not necessarily
it's not like a choice or people choose i will manage it's basically the yeah the the default
result if you are not operating within the recognition of liability to suffering
if you are not operating within framework of that existential anxiety you are managing your
suffering even unknowingly things you do will be on the level of management not uprooting it because
you have well either have no recognition or have fallen from the recognition of that general
anxious nature of your situation duka anise disease not duka or is bothering me that's all
secondary to it yeah yeah yeah because i mean duka is if it's only when something is bothering
you then it's very easy you can just try to find the you people it's not it's not really it's
the problem the problem is not that people haven't heard enough of dama or haven't read enough of
the suitors the problem is that pretty much none of them like all the people they practice but without
actual becoming arhans and so on means something's wrong there and it's not that there was lack of
teachings or lack of suitors or Buddhist instruction or that it's not clear enough is that they never
ever heard or learned on what level it needs to be applied and it was always stayed within the
framework of management unknowingly so that's what i mean you have to stay within that recognition
of that liability prey to suffering which is pretty much the framework of anxiety
so that's why people would go mad if they stay on that level and often would like or quickly
manage it because yeah they don't know any other way so you need to censor strain virtue is what
will prevent you from going mental okay so there's two things now you've said here you said that
censor straight and like morality is what prevents you from going mental and you said there's
he will prevent you going mad on account of anxiety he will not approve the anxiety
yeah then you can approve the eventually
yeah and to put in like basically from from if i if i understand well like if you if you
to practice correctly if you want if you practice directly and then you have to be always practicing
with a view basically to the aim of of getting out of suffering yeah like this has to be the aim
caught looking the liability yeah like this this is what i this is what i understand like that you
have to like this is your the aim should be always at every moment and it's not exactly but it's not
it's not an abstract aim in a sense it's not like oh i must keep this thought in my mind it's it's
the anxious aim it's the aim you feel anxiety remains there liable to it the aim is there outlined
you don't need to think it anymore in that sense what's my aim what is my aim but unless you have
uncovered the liability of that's anxious in its nature then you have to drill and drill until you
learn what dukkha is first yeah so they first like well about like making this aim clear and then
taking your actions in order to bring taking every action or taking every practice in order to bring
your closer to this aim this is correct this is i clear about um then feeling like do you mean that
you should have to feel anxious constantly in practicing or no what you don't have to be like
uh sort of trying to contrive anxiety but if you're thinking correctly you will feel uneasy to what
extent that uneasiness will be a threatening anxiety and fear or not depends to what extent
you've basically developed your seal and are able to hold it but the recognition of the peril is
is the i mean part of understanding the danger is part of freeing yourself from sensuality from the
world from the aggregates from everything so the danger is still there i don't see it but yes
how dangerous that danger is for you it's basically how how much you have understood it or not but
it's still the same danger so initially it's probably going to be very frightening and very anxious
but if you don't act out of it don't break the sealer sensory strength and that strength that
you've accumulated through basic controlling your output your behavior then you can actually well
you you will be able like anxiety is a problem when it's threatening when you when there is a risk
of being overwhelmed by it if you have sustained it long enough if there is less and less risk for
that danger to overwhelm you but you and then you get to see it even clearer ah the peril the danger
becomes apparent and when the danger is apparent you have abandoned any passion towards that which
is dangerous so that means completely not abstract or on the level of
theories of figuring it out it's actually felt the danger is felt first and then you not being
liable to that same danger is also felt which is when ah the danger becomes apparent thus the
freedom becomes apparent from it so how much you're going to feel anxiety and when in what
process depends pretty much on how much samadhi who have developed how well your virtue has been
established and how intense is your current recognition of samadhi or sorry of anxiety of
liability to suffering sometimes will be more something will tell you have good days bad days
but that is that is the the field where you have to do the work it's not optional that's what i'm
saying how much you're going to suffer or come with this option that's what i said sometimes
for some monks practice is pleasant with pleasant results painful with pleasant results and so on
but it's the same thing it's not like oh i have this approach or that approach it's just
some minds are stronger they will suffer less on account of the threat because they have more
composure samadhi some minds are not that strong so they'll suffer more that's what exactly put the
who who practiced through the persona not samadhi as much his way was unpleasant and long
but then yeah he was the second to the Buddha in terms of the foremost wisdom
but if you start actually practicing rightly even the unpleasant way you will recognize
the liberating aspect of it so you will have no problem in basically enduring that anxiety and
doesn't matter how big it gets and how threatened it is but in order to get there you need to start
rightly and that will be hard for somebody who hasn't been practicing on that level
so be just if i so i don't understand well what you're saying you say there's you have to like
you have to feel anxious feel anxiety feel suffering feel the suffering in the sense that you
are that you do over like in a that you have no control over your over your life and that you will
get old and that you will get sick and that you will die no matter what you do and all of this
um so you have to start like start from this point in order to have like the in order to like
keep the have the aim and then keep the aim of keep the right context as a basis yeah for the
correct direction if you practice yeah and that's what i mean that's why people don't keep that
right context not because they choose something it's because they don't want to feel that discomfort
it's not an abstract course that they make or some like a little mistake because they
didn't have enough information no it's existentially avoiding the recognition that you are within the
perilous situation without any means of escape and that's very frightening that's essentially fear
of death in the nacho all the people are not necessarily even my colleague that way you'll be
aware of it it cut out there at for um for a moment um can you hear me now sure oops okay okay um
so yeah so just cut there a little bit the last part i heard was um that you were saying how when
people like start by the wrong on the wrong start on the wrong footing essentially or they don't
practice rightly it's because of um basically because of ignoring ignoring this fact there's
ignore yeah ignoring your which means you can always fix it nor you can always fix your footing
at any given time you can always fix that you can always restart and reestablish the right framework
but the thing is the more you give in to ignoring it because it's fundamentally frightening and
unpleasant the more you drift away and more incapable of accepting it you are because the
more the more effort in trying to outrun it you invested so theoretically anybody can become
an Idaho at any stage of life but practically if you spend 20 30 years more avoid in this and even
practicing while avoiding it it would be virtually impossible for you after all that invested effort
to basically just wipe your slate clean and re-accept that fundamental liability that will
fill you with anxiety and make you like back onto the day one i mean people won't do that in for
mundane things let alone for something so profound and hard to approach such as you know existential
anxiety yeah i mean that's why i mean i think most people they don't really practice with the
with the for that for the aim of the of the of the goal really they don't
but they don't be practiced for another reason or for like wanting to like basically wanting to
feel better or to and there is no if they don't practice with that as a basis the right basis
they don't practice dama even if it's the dama they're doing i mean the buddha said himself only yeah
like he he's teaching has only one taste like the ocean has only one taste of salt taste the
freedom from suffering nothing else so suffering freedom from it is the only place where dama can be
so i mean it's an option not it's not oh let me choose this or choose that
it's the only way um
there was maybe just one more i i'm i'm aware of taking up a lot of your your time already um
um and i would just like to maybe to ask on one more one more point
a bit or two so like if i can kind of summarize basically the like overall the the different
points that are mentioned um so from the beginning you have to start like with uh
recognizing that you're sick like the recognizing that you you're what the nature of your problem is
and then you have to like make the aim clear a bit like if you're not practicing with the
realization that you're sick and like we needing to be healed then you're not practicing right
you have to resist the temptation to not to manage the symptoms at the expense of the recognition
of your illness that's still there even if you remove the symptoms yeah but am i still alive yeah
thus i'm still ill so don't get complacent even when things don't bother you and suddenly don't
make your practice revolve around dealing with things that bother you only yeah yeah so i mean
don't look just for a painkiller basically like you want to go to the you you want to go to see
that go to a doctor yeah if the pain is too much take the painkiller but don't forget that
fundamentally the only reason you needed to take the painkiller and the head pain is because
you're still sick there's still the underlying illness yeah yeah and as long as you haven't cured
the underlying illness then actually you can you can continue to take painkillers but the illness
is still there and it's getting worse exactly and now you don't even have the symptoms to tell you
how worse it is yeah yeah exactly so it's a it's a big problem i agree like
because you can feel so kind like you can you can make yourself feel very calm by just like
concentrating on the breath or something like that and you can spend hours a day just concentrating on
sensation of breathing and now you feel so much better and you think everything's going so much
better is you think you're fine so now you stop like searching for a way out because you think
you're fine yeah that's that's what i said in other talks like most of like today's meditation
Buddhist meditation practice is just calming techniques which is fine if you need to calm down
but don't confuse that for samadhi there will result in panya and complete wisdom and liberation
yeah and then like the other point is then about like what what is the like once you once you know
what you're what you're doing then what does the practice consist of at one point you said morality
is to stop yourself from going mad um i don't know if i have seen this uh
uh like i think morality is essential like it's a essential base of of practicing morality is
in the sense of like no not having any wrongdoing in in thoughts words or actions
and then new payer what you were what you were talking about what you were saying is that
basically you um you need to kind of realize that's the problem like understand where the problem is
in the sense that you that you can become affected by anger or that you can become that you become
greedy or that you are that you are or having desire for things in the first place and not to
just like want to kind of manage these things when they arise so this point is okay um
and yeah so then the and then the correct practice like to what yeah what what kind of
still is like i'm kind of trying to figure it out is the if you're if you're practicing
rightly like if you if you if you practice if you if you practice correctly
then you should see that you're practicing correctly right so there's no need to have the
same anxiety of uh that was there in the beginning if you know that you're practicing rightly yeah
if you're not so see you're not ignoring your liability to suffer you're not ignoring the
peril you're not turning a blind eye you're not distracting yourself from it and it doesn't
bother you as much now because you pretend it's not there because you get used to it
anxiety will stop bothering you when you get used to it
when you are able to maintain composure in the face of it and the only way to do that is to
train composure in the face of anxiety and to come back just to just come back to the beginning
about the because you were telling the base of like the base of being able to practice
mindfulness correctly is to have the the right kind of awareness to be able to
uh have awareness correctly which um is not about just uh like paying attention to sensation
or paying attention to sound or paying attention to something else nor is it about like analyzing
your thoughts or analyzing your uh like experience and so now you were um so now you said the periphery
meaning the like what you said was the basis for that for on which you're paying attention
periphery means the background the background of whatever is currently attended in there so
the the mind is the background in itself the intentionality the possibilities as we described
that's already the background in itself so it's that's that's what peripheral is
okay it's it can sound technical and i think in those years we use it for the sake of the context
but it's really the background of your currently engaged experience that you don't want to make
into a foreground because then again the point is not what is the foreground or what is the
background the point is to be aware of the background while there is whatever action
intention presently and during feeling and so on in the foreground and that background is literally
the knowledge of that situation nothing else no sensations no nothing specific that's why it's
so hard to see because it's nonspecific and what else is nonspecific what the nature of things is
nonspecific the nature of this specific cup the nature of this specific object is nonspecific
from the point of view of the specific object to which that object kind of pertains to
and that's that's in essence done the nature of things so it's always found in that background
where the knowledge is
so that's what i mean oh specifically there is a
not where the knowledge is yeah where the knowledge is yeah specifically there is an insult
an angry voice everything all of that is quite specific not specifically there is a presence
of suffering that i'm resisting nonspecifically there is discomfort there are many different
nonspecific ways you can take but it will be the same nature of this experience so fundamentally
the problem here is not what's being said what's being heard not even what's being felt yeah the
problem is that within this basically experience the whole i'm resisting it and i have a view
that i should not suffer that i'm in control and i should not suffer that's all implicit
so that's the nature of that experience that is the background that is the the vessel in which you
and that's where you get you get insulted when you hear something immediately because the framework
ready for insult is already there in other words framework ready to resist any form of discomfort
that comes through the senses is already there currently maintained by you
