So, these are a few questions, and I've got this one, and I've got this one, and I've
got it up. I have been celibate for some time, and now have the fear that I will lose it.
My mind is full of fear and has no peace. Yet peace is what I expected to get from celibacy.
What am I doing wrong?
Well, you get peace from losing desire towards sensuality. You don't get peace for celibacy
if you still value sensuality. So, celibacy is a necessary prerequisite to lose the desire
towards sensuality. But if you don't work on that part, mental part of your attraction
to sensual objects, celibacy will free you and give you. Well, it will give you certainly
a less disturbing life, a less engaging life, less entanglement in life, not engaging physically
with sensuality. It's factually less entangling. But yes, if you still value sensuality, value
sensual objects, saying no to them will hurt. So, did that person expect celibacy to do
the work for him? So, if I'm celibate, if I just abstain from this, sensuality will
magically evaporate from my mind. Or did they also on top of that sensory strength, virtue,
celibacy, then make the effort to see the peril in sens objects, to see the peril in
desire. If not, then the peace they were hoping to get on account of celibacy alone, it's
kind of on the level of sensual satisfaction again. They were hoping that they will have
this pleasure of a peaceful experience because they're not engaging sexually anymore. But
that's not how it works. That would be too easy. That would be too easy. Just be celibate
with that said, you're an out of hand. But no, you have to be, you want to be an out
of hand. But in and of itself, it will not result in the unshakable peace. But factually,
as I said, it will still result in less entanglement. So, focusing that on the benefits
of doing it, don't just hope that it will do the work for you while you mentally still
value the sensual objects. So, once you're celibate, are you now spending your time contemplating
the danger of sens desire, the lack of satisfaction, the context of entanglement and disentanglement,
the value of this entanglement? Are you making the effort on that mental level now that you
created the basis through celibacy and virtue? Or are you just celibate and then just sort
of threading water, just waiting for the work to magically be presented as completed?
It's similar to someone who is like just doing, taking on the rules, taking on certain
reasons and then hoping that. Yeah, okay. So, I understand now my duties to be celibate,
okay, I'm celibate, okay. So, where's the peace? It won't come as a result of it because
you haven't taken it rightly. You take celibacy so that you can tame your mind. You don't take
celibacy because that will do the work for you. So, remind yourself for the reasons
you're wanting to practice, keep that context, work on it. It's again, it's the similar
of light in the sticks, you have fire sticks, light in the fire with the sticks while you're
in the water. So, you can then, you realize, I have to come out of this river in order
to sort of rub the sticks to get the fire. But if you just come out of the river and
you make no effort to rub the sticks to light the fire, well, you won't get the fire. You
still won't get the original result that made you come out of the water. But you have.
But you have to come out of the water. So, that's a celibacy. It's not optional for
somebody who wants to practice really for the results. But then, once you celebrate,
that's not the end of the practice. Coming out of the water, yeah. Now, learning to
light the fire and making the effort to dry the sticks, not soak them, not keep them in
touch with water, even if you're out. In other words, stop valuing sensuality, stop hoping
for some degree of central pleasures after I become peaceful and so on, you have to say
no to that entire domain. And you would say no, not by kind of all just decide to say
no, but by contemplating the factual danger of it, the factual lack of satisfaction,
the factual perpetuation of the problem and on peace. And that in and of itself would
be enough, actually, to already start seeing the benefits of being celibate, for example.
And the dangers of not. And the dangers of not. Even if you don't get some higher results,
you still recognize, well, yeah, it's still factually. And more freedom comes that way.
So a question that's related to this. Now that I'm old, celibacy is quite easy. All
of my previous passions have faded and now I dwell equanimous to most things. Most, but
I fear that sickness and death will still be suffering for me. What should I do next?
I think what should I do first is more likely, or you should ask, because celibacy and freedom
from sensuality does not come with old age by default. As I said before, it goes underground
with old age by default means you think now it's not there, because it's too far gone
to see it. And the reminders of it still being there are like hard to spot because,
you know, the vitality, the strength of the senses, the zeal, it's gone. It's just tired
to trade it. But the attitude, the assumption of what where the last is, where the attraction
is, where the desires are being satisfied, that's still there. And that's now much harder
to see and uproot. Because if the person then gets sick, if the person is truly economist,
then losing the prospect of losing the body even more.
Exactly. If you truly practice celibacy to its fulfillment, i.e. abandoning of central
desires, a prospect of sickness and death would not be frightening at all. And you would
not even be doubtful about it. Because that, which is going to be wiped away with sickness
and death, is that which you seemingly have no desire towards anymore.
So now your senses that you're still very much bound with are even more invisible. Remember
we spoke in previous talks, senses, sense organs that are always like negative, that
a negative space in regard to what you look, see, smell, taste, touch. So it is defined
in return by sight, sound, smell, taste touches. That is how you can infer and discern that
organs are there. Now, since sight, sight, smell, taste touches have been bombarding
you for decades and decades and decades and fatigue and you have no more inspirational
strength and like joy towards the pleasures, you just tie it. You just rather not be bothered
means your negative spaces of your senses will be even more invisible now. Because they're
factually not being as defined as before, which is what people confuse as peace. Oh,
look, I'm not disturbed as much as I was before. Yeah, because you can't know it. But if you
truly want to see if you're peaceful or not, well, contemplating losing the dear ones,
the loved ones, experiencing misfortune, can you still experience things on account of
or of any kind of anything that could happen to this body, sickness, aging, paddles of
that kind, would you equally remain unperturbed if you live a dying next moment? If not, means
Oh, okay. So you missed the opportunity to approve the dependence on the negative sense
organs, negative spaces of the sense organs. So now it's going to be even harder. So I
guess what you could do is again, spend every minute of your life contemplating the value
of virtue, sensory strain, practice generosity. Don't give rise to thoughts of ill will,
thoughts of harm. Don't give rise to the sense of false complacency and safety. One account
of things not disturbing you much. And then if you were truly free, you have nothing to
lose with all these practices. If you were not truly free, well, you were really soon
enough with all these practices. Because also eating, a person could take on certain. Yeah,
yeah, the reasons for the eating practice increased moderation in eating to put it that way. Because
that's still something that people really get into pleasure from. Yeah. I can't have this
sexual part anymore. Sure. But sounds, food, food, comfort, physical comfort, being sheltered
from the elements. And I don't mean like, you know, go and live outside blizzard or something,
but how soft is your bed? How soft are pillows? How warm are your blankets? All of that,
the purpose is one and only is to bright comfort for the body, for the sense organs that you
still are. So would you be disturbed on account of losing those things? An account of maybe
saying no to a degree and sleep on a harder bed, without a pillow. How miserable you'll
be next day if you didn't have proper night of comfortable sleep. So you can still practice
within that, even if you waited, because you know, there was that old lady, a whole past
80 or whatever in the suitors that was had what I think two sons, husband, lots of wealth,
husband passed away. She thought, Hey, why don't I give my wealth to my two sons and
their families? And they look after me. So she gave all of her wealth, house everything
to the two sons. And then from, you know, she was spent time with one, then going to spend
time with the other. And on one occasion, when she was like that, arriving at a one sons
house, before she could she overheard him saying, Oh, there she is coming again. Like,
well, she has the other son, doesn't she, you know, the wife complaining or something.
So she was heartbroken. The fact that they actually started despising her when she factually
gave it all away. So he left, she left, saw the nuns getting sheltered in the food. I
thought, Well, how might this will become an answer? I can at least have someone to sleep
and eat. So she didn't even want to practice. She was old. She couldn't go pin the butt
because she was old. She was just would clean up the place when the younger nuns go pin
the part prepared everything when they bring the food. She was just like a servant there.
And once she overheard one nun talk to the other about the some aspect of the dama that
they heard from the Buddha. And then at night when she finished all of her chores, she couldn't
even do the walking meditation straight, because she was old. She was walking up and
down the corridor, propped with against the wall and contemplating what she heard. And
she became out of hand. So it is still possible. But you do really have to commit to it like
it is your last chance because it might well be for a long, long time.
