What is an elinquishment in giving up?
What do you need to give up? Why? What does it mean? Why is it necessary?
So what practically? What are the things you have to give up?
Did you actually step to trying to relinquish for sake?
Trying to manage the suffering?
Okay, so if you're not trying to manage suffering but you still live with your spouse, children,
can you keep that and then give up management?
Can there be an arhat and light in the freedom of suffering?
Probably not.
So there are certain things you have to give up, give up.
So where is the line with the things you have to give up, give up?
Maybe you should try to understand what things you don't really need,
or you can live without them and then...
Yeah, that's a good idea.
Basically, do you evaluate what is necessary to have, what isn't, and then start there.
But obviously sometimes that can result, not that specifically,
but people can have a view in regards to that whereby they think,
okay, so if I give everything up, I'll be free.
So they don't use any discernment or reason to see where the line is
and just start throwing everything away, so to speak.
And yeah, that might result in a very simple life, but fundamentally,
you cannot do that with your own body and your own senses,
and that's where the problem is.
You can't just discard like you can items that you possess.
So that needs to be understood while it is still there.
So while you still have it, you need to understand how you cannot have it really,
without destroying it, without blaming the eyes or ears for hearing or seeing and so on.
People often think, if I like something, I should give it up.
So for example, if... I should give up my likes.
Yes, whatever food is my preference, for example, I should stop eating that food.
Is that a valid...? Is it? No.
Because that's not what the problem is.
The problem is not that something is agreeable to you,
because if things are...
the problem is that you can't see the line between something being agreeable
and you needing to have it and needing to keep it and wanting it,
or being enslaved by it, or being dependant on it.
So just because something is agreeable to you,
that you have a preference for something doesn't mean you have to relinquish it.
What if you're emotionally attached to it?
You're going to be miserable if you don't get what you like.
Should you give it up then?
So sometimes I think yes, it can help,
but then there's obviously a limit to that.
You can't give up all food just because you can't stop having some kind of desire in regard to food.
But would it be okay that somebody gives up only food that they like
and only stuff that they don't like?
Would that result in growing their mind?
No. Why not?
Because it's still acting out of likes and dislikes.
Just denying, just doing the opposite.
Right, but they're not feeding their likes anymore.
They're not eating the stuff they like, the only stuff that they don't like.
Yes, but they're acting out of the same thing.
Your preference?
Just turning it the other way.
The preference towards the liking food?
Yes, the taste.
Oh, sure.
And what else is a problem there?
The belief that the problem is in the taste.
Exactly.
Your preference, your like, your emotional dependence was not in the taste.
So yes, there is a practical line there.
As in, if you have no perspective, then maybe give it up.
Don't eat that, just to see whether your mind will be disturbed and how much.
But fundamentally, yes, that is not where the problem is.
The problem is in the desire and lust that's infecting your thoughts,
not the sense objects.
And that's where the uprooting, that's where the true relinquishment happens.
But in order to even kind of comprehend that direction,
yes, some practical physical relinquishment needs to be done,
needs to be actually performed.
So yeah, references.
Of course, the precepts, things you would give up through the precepts.
And then further than that, yeah, you can, you know, everybody can get really inspired
with the idea of your still life and then just start throwing everything out.
But now that can become an issue.
You might be just acting out of a view that implies that problem was in these things,
not in my desire and lust on the mental level.
But if on the other hand you use some practical kind of reasoning,
as I will do, I really need this.
Can I live without it?
Certainly it's better to be less cluttered.
Certainly it's better to go in the direction of relinquishment and simplification.
And then fine, then if you decide that things can be dismissed,
given up, given away, that's all right.
But you still keep the perspective that the problem is actually fundamental
on the level of the mind taking up those things,
the mind taking up the preferences with lust,
leaning towards them with lust, with aversion and so on.
What kind of relinquishment then?
Because the sutta says basically that pretty much the prerequisite
for establishing your mind and dwelling in jhana is the complete relinquishment.
And even Satipatana, which is generally the practice of mindfulness,
presupposes overcoming happiness and concerns in regard to the entire world.
And then you can dwell mindfully.
So that's also a form of relinquishment.
To what extent?
I mean, I don't need to ask to what extent.
I just said it, the entire world.
But what would be the practical examples of giving up
an overcoming happiness and relinquishment in regard to the entire world?
So you keep the precepts, you're not engaging with centrality,
but there is still obviously more to the world.
What are the other things you have to give up practically,
not just metaphorically,
in order to be able to surmount the world,
to surmount the concern regarding the world,
in order to be able to dwell correctly, mindful,
in order to experience that vowsaga that suttas talk about,
that then you are truly detached from the realm of thinking and pondering.
The mind is withdrawn from it, and that is the first jhana.
What are those things you have to give up?
Obviously, core centrality, core seal will, chore, indulgency food, of course,
and company, of course, but what else now?
There is more to that, obviously.
Maybe it's indulgence and thought, I'd say,
to put too much value on sort of arranging things.
If you see that this ultimately is futile,
I mean, recognizing that there is a kindrance.
You mean like arranging things on the level of the thought?
Yes.
Sort of controlling it or making it whatever?
Yeah, sort of, yeah, quieting it.
Yeah, but see the problem with that could be that somebody can do that
before they got the right view.
So they are quieting their mind down with ignorance.
So they still don't know the escape, but they start valuing the non-disturbance.
But seeking the practice is disturbing, but it's a good type of disturbance
because it can result in the right view,
that can then result in complete liberation.
We spoke about it relatively often when somebody,
and even the Buddha himself, said that the two types of thought,
like he would first realize how the problem is the unwholesome thoughts,
not thought in itself, then he put them into two categories.
Anything that's greed, aversion, delusion, he would not engage with,
a non-greed, non-version, delusion, he would allow.
And when greed, aversion, delusion present himself,
he would not try to get rid of it, get rid of it,
but he would just remind himself of the context, of the peril,
of the danger, of how little satisfaction,
how this is intending for his harm, for harm of others, for harm of all,
then those thoughts would subside on their own.
And that was his practice, and that was not peaceful.
That was still work, that was still burden,
obviously on the right level of enduring these thoughts,
pressuring you, not acting out,
and then re-establishing the context in regard to them, until they subside.
When he fully developed that, completely,
sort of, when all he had was the good, non-greed, non-aversion, non-delusion,
he was still maintaining the context, and then he realized,
oh, but yeah, I don't need to do this now,
because these thoughts are not harmful.
So what if I just don't let them be?
Oh, and by the way, there was that difference in that Madhima Agama,
in that Sutta.
In Pali, he doesn't really, he just goes into Second Jhana.
But this explains how he was first intentionally involved
with maintaining the context and doing that Bhavana
in regard to the unwholesome states, until they subside.
Then after that, when he had wholesome states endure,
he realized, oh, I don't need to be intentionally involved
with this context constantly, because these thoughts are not contradicting it,
not going against it.
And then he, oh, what if I allow these thinking and pondering, basically, to be?
And instead, just unify my mind internally on the basis of this wholesome environment
that I have work for.
And then he entered the first Jhana.
And then furthermore, then goes into Second.
So that was, like, missing step I was talking about,
that you wouldn't find in the Pali Sutta.
So that's the point.
So, like, yes, you shouldn't be, or, like, you know,
if somebody is trying to control the thoughts and make any plan,
yeah, you've got to recognize that it's not going to lead to a solution.
But at the same time, thoughts are not a problem.
First Jhana is thinking and pondering entirely.
And it's the peaceful sublime abiding that's sufficient for Arahantship,
when the mind is totally withdrawn from it.
So the problem is whether those thoughts are alluding,
greater version delusion, distraction, cruelty, and so on.
And those are now subtle things that I was leading to
by asking what are the other less subtle things you need to give up
before you can start discerning these roots of your thoughts
in regard to the world.
So given the core sensuality is gone, you know,
cruelty, acting out of anger is gone.
What are the things that are not gone?
There's worldly gain, renown, status, position.
So basically kind of your relationship with others,
your ideas, the connections, comparisons.
Go on.
Well, I was going to suggest that it would then come down to the level of views,
relinquishing the dependence on,
well, what come down to different types of wrong views in regard to the world.
So how would one practically relinquish views in regard to the world,
relinquish dependencies on the notions of others and so on?
What do you practically need to do?
Can you just start thinking about those things
and relinquish them by figuring them out?
Or you do need to increase that certain level of withdrawal from certain things.
In the same sense, precepts withdraw you from certain unwholesome behaviors
by body and speech.
Yeah, it seems to me that this desire for gain and renown and status and position
is all bound to the self view as well.
Like, you know, there's got to be a self image here, or a notion of self here,
which then, you know, will, and then there will be others
and then there's this comparison, better, worse and all the rest of it.
Yeah, that's all kind of the result of it.
But as I said, in order to come to that, which is a problem, what do you need to give up?
Your household life.
In a way, yeah, more specifically.
Or the lightning company.
There you go.
Basically, the lightning company, as in...
But what does it mean to delight the company?
Yeah, we can get to that as well, actually, because it doesn't just mean...
Because people can think, oh, Buddha said seclusion, and I'm always in seclusion,
but the real reason is because I really have ill will towards everybody else.
And it's like, well, that's not the seclusion, because you're not secluded.
The Buddha said the true seclusion, like the one dwells in company even when he's alone,
if his mind is not free from greed, ill will and delusion.
So, yes, physical seclusion is necessary,
but the reason why you do it is even more necessary, more important.
So, physical withdrawal, not seeking company, not finding delight in company,
kind of, yeah, that would diminish you referencing yourself from the point of view of company and others.
You're distracting yourself from the, again, point of view of company.
What other things in regard to the world?
Like this, how would you abandon concerns in regard to the world?
What do you need to give up? What makes you concerned regarding the entire world and people and so on?
So, we're talking about giving up central behaviour, ill will.
Okay, what else do you do on the level of your senses with the world?
How are you engaging with the world?
So, through company, what are the things?
Well, I suppose, seeking information about it, seeking...
Exactly.
Yeah.
Engaging with the level of information, news, distraction, views on the level of ideals that pertain to regard to the world,
the world, better place, all of that needs to be abandoned, just to begin Satipatana, rightly.
Because those are all factual concerns.
They might not be apparent to somebody who is also, like, crowded with sensuality and household life and so on.
Once you withdraw yourself from that, yeah, that's where the mind will revolve around.
Those are the underlying basis there.
And that's why, even like the...
When Buddha describes a monk, obviously, with the right view, he says,
a skilled monk, a noble disciple, abandoned, having been withdrawn physically from these sensuality, aversion, ill will,
he abandons thoughts of sensuality, thoughts of cruelty, thoughts of harming.
Then he abandons, like, they kind of concede a course.
Then he also abandons thoughts of his own, like, clanhood and homeland.
And basically, on the level of, now, that's where your concede is, who you are in that broader sense.
So, pretty much concerning, you know, that the level of the world as us humans, he abandons even those thoughts.
Again, not by denying them, not by trying to get rid of them,
but by, okay, I have those thoughts now and during in this mind.
Well, let me establish the same context I was established for when he came to sensuality.
These thoughts lead to more concede, more suffering, more burden.
Whenever there is identity, where the traces of identity or full-blown identity,
dukkha will find the footing.
Thus, by thinking these thoughts, I am not inclining this mind towards peace,
I am inclining it towards harm, towards myself, towards others, towards everything else.
And that's that, so you have to give up.
And you wouldn't be able to give up these thoughts if you're still in company of others,
spending your time talking about politics and kings and worlds and ministers,
as the suitors would mention.
Well, we have the present equivalent of that.
Reading news, reading information, keeping in touch with happenings,
even if not necessarily, you know, political or something, but just in the world of science,
in the world of art, in the world of it, in the world of full stop,
means you still have certain connections to it internally.
And that's truly where the problem is.
And for as long as those things are not given up on their external level,
these thoughts will not be seen for what they are, the subtle ones.
And even the duty towards the family.
I mean, the whole point of the homeless life was leaving it all behind.
So, like, you know, many monks would be kind of,
but it's still, it's my duty towards family, my own family.
It's like, well, to that extent, you will not be abandoning thoughts of your clanshood
and belonging and caste and wherever you come from,
because you are still taking on that external duty
through which you're maintaining this internal identity.
It has to be, I am alone in this world
for which I have no more happiness nor concern.
And the reason that you would have no more happiness or concern in regard to the world
is precisely because you would see also this, for example,
you know, if you get bothered by, like, war going on in the world
or poverty going on in the world or things going on,
but you see what is the root cause of any of those things,
greed, aversion, delusion, for example.
So if you're taking, if you see where that problem is rightly in yourself,
you could not be concerned whatsoever with anything that goes on with the world.
You're taking that seriously.
That is why you are concerned with the world.
Exactly, because you are not.
Because of those things that are root of all these problems and concerns
and seeking the safety and so on.
So that needs to be relinquished as well.
There's that, obviously, mundane right view
and that wrong view that says, there is no mother, there's no father,
no world, no next world, nothing.
No next world, there's nothing, there's no given.
You know, it doesn't really exist.
See, I'm not identified with any of those things.
Thus, it's right.
But that's actually the wrong.
It's upside down, yeah.
There is mother, there is father, there is family.
And you have overcome the concern in regard to it.
You have denied it or got rid of them or threw them out
like you would throw your possessions.
And that's the point.
That's what I mean, like, oh, so you can't throw out the world.
You can't throw out your senses, or well, you can,
but you would still equally be bound by those domains, by those consciousness.
You're not free.
What you can do is overcome.
That basis, for concern, for lust, for aversion, for this right,
for needing the safety, the basis, basically,
that's keeping you from your mind from being liberated from it.
But as I said, it's roots are on the mental level,
but in order to arrive at that, certain practical giving-ups need to be done.
So, like refraining from seeking out information,
engaging, discussing these things.
They're like, yeah, but I mean, I can, but there's no end to this.
And there's, but there must be, why?
Because you feel insecure and unsafe.
Well, does it come from the world, the lack of safety,
or does it come from a mind that's not liberated?
You're making a choice there.
If you act towards the world, well, you got your answer.
You might claim that you are still practicing for liberation.
You're not.
You had a crossroads and you perpetually keep choosing back onto the world.
And that's exactly how you would go beyond the central domain,
not by suppressing it so it doesn't come up anymore,
nor by literally you stepping out.
So you see it over there and you see how safe you are,
because that thing cannot not, it can only be over there and you know that.
That's what it said, like in the first jhana,
the thoughts are assailed by perceptions of sensuality
that you basically withdrawn yourself from,
because that's kind of what's in front, but you are outside now.
And sometimes there are concerns to it that being withdrawn
from all these talks and whatever may produce an impression on others
that you are avoiding them, that you are hostile to them maybe,
and even in monastic environment as well.
So basically you have to take it on as your responsibility.
You have to accept it, because some people will probably see it that way.
So you have to accept that, yeah, well that's,
and see that's why people would keep in touch.
Oh, that's touch base.
Let's just keep seeing and talking to each other every day
so we all see that we are all right,
because I mean we still might be all right,
but the fact that somebody is now withdrawn from it,
the mind starts thinking, what if they are not all right?
What if they are upset with me?
It's like, well, yeah, there is no end to that proliferation.
The only end to that proliferation is to recognize,
okay, well, have I done anything by body speech and mind to make them upset?
No? Then okay, then this mind that's trying to make me go back there
to make sure nobody is upset with me,
I will restrain, I will re-establish context in regard to it
until those thoughts subside.
All if upon reviewing you're like, oh yeah, no, I did act a bit like this
like that, well, then go and apologize, sort it out.
But still, do not use whether you feel good or bad as a criteria
whether you should act, but actually use your reflection
and see whether there was anything done by body speech towards them
to make them upset.
If not, then you've got to endure the irrational mind
that's trying to get you out of the solitude
and seek safety in your tribe.
And that is the thoughts of, oh, what will my peers,
what will my clan, what is my family,
what does my brothers think of me?
Those are the factual concerns.
It's not like these random kind of abstract thoughts
that a skilled monk would have.
No, it's like on the level of sensuality and ill will,
that now you abandoned, well, what took their place
are thoughts about who you are, who you were,
how others see you, your past,
it's going to have that same weight.
And now you practice that right context in regard to it,
which means it's not always going to feel pleasant
in the same sense, practicing the context against the,
you know, I don't know, sensual pull
or acting out of a version won't feel pleasant.
That's also quite directly related to being unable
to see wholesome as wholesome and unwholesome as unwholesome
because measuring yourself, what I should do
or what I shouldn't do, did I act wrongly or not,
on the level of, what will my clan,
the people I admire, the people I whatever,
what will they think of me, is basically,
in the beginning you might need to use the advice
of wise people to send you in a good direction,
but at some point you need to be able to discern
for yourself what is acting wholesome,
what is acting unwholesome, and not depend on basically
and when you do those thoughts will still come.
Because that's what the mind does.
It still has the habits rooted in those subtler forms
of lasting aversion.
But yeah, if you have the right reference,
you won't be acting out of how those thoughts make you feel.
You won't be acting out of doubt, in other words.
You would know whether to know, I'll go ahead and do this
and re-establish the context until subside on its own,
subsides on its own, or, oh yeah, no, okay,
I should actually make some effort externally
to sort the issues I created,
and then go back to this either way.
I remember one discussion with Monk about it,
and well, basically he was referring to the Buddha himself,
talking, having small talks basically,
when somebody comes to him and they exchange some greeting.
Yeah, pleasantries and stuff.
Yeah, pleasant talks.
So how to understand, where is the limit to it?
The reason behind.
See, they came and started small talk for the other purpose,
so it's like a way of expressing sort of friendliness,
and then it would go into a point.
So he wouldn't have a small talk for the sake of distraction,
for the sake of non-perspective,
for the sake of greed or aversion.
He wouldn't have the small talk for the sake of carelessness.
So yeah, that's what it is.
Maybe one can say that well,
as long as one sees that these talks really produce some...
One main thing is that as long as one realises one is not the Buddha,
not even an arahan, one will not understand
how can an arahan have a small talk.
So until then, maybe take the small talk seriously in that sense,
do it only like as I said, as a way of relating to others,
but not more, not less, not make a big deal out of it either.
I'm going to stop talking to me and get angry with everyone
who says good morning to you or something.
But fundamentally recognise, yeah, I don't know where the line is,
because if I did, I would have the right view
and be on the verge of arahantship and so on.
And when I am, then I'll figure out how can the Buddha speak
with kings about seemingly pointless stuff.
So there is that order of things.
So could the cruelty and being that as long as I know
that this sort of talks is sort of unwholesome to me at least,
I should refrain from them.
If you know what unwholesome is, like not like all,
I don't like this, that doesn't necessarily mean it's unwholesome.
No, I mean, I say producing all these concerns and I mean,
there are some, I say, innocent talk about politics.
I know that you are stepping in.
Yeah, and then...
I think that's an oxymoron.
No, no, sure, yeah, of course.
Like if I don't want my mind going there,
yeah, you don't have to talk to it.
And if people keep insisting, then you basically stop associating with them.
It's as simple as that.
Because yeah, you know, just general household life,
that those are the factual, real life concerns
and they should not pertain.
That's why, like even in the suttas, you know,
when monks would sort of put each other down,
they would say like, ah, you can't take him seriously.
He's intimate with householders.
He has householders for his friends.
Means he's not a proper monk.
That's all he took.
Having householders is your friends.
Because you kind of share their concerns by implication.
But then there were cases of other hands having householders for their friends.
So in and of itself, as I said, that's not where the root of the problem is.
But most practically, for most people,
yeah, that has to be restrained until you actually approve it.
And then to what extent you'll engage in those talks afterwards,
you'll see, but it won't be done for the sake of distraction or whatever else.
Or out of sea.
Like, I don't really care about the politics,
but I care what others think about me.
And now they want to talk politics.
And if I don't think bad about me, so I'll talk politics or whatever they want to talk.
Well, that's equally unwholesome.
So I'm acting out of that weakness.
No, I need to take on the weight.
Yeah, they might talk badly about me behind my back.
That's fine.
And that's part of relinquishing my concern, my conceit defined by others.
It's not going to be pleasant because it was something you accrued and lived by.
So it's who you are, pretty much.
