I had a couple of thoughts.
One thing I thought about was a heedfulness or diligence. They're translated in different
ways. So the quality that the Buddha says is where all skillful qualities converge and
is the way to not decline in the Dhamma. So what is it? And who does it apply to? Where
does it start? Anybody else want to say something? So the heedfulness, so can somebody without
the right view, be heedful? No. In a common sense, yes. Whatever you want to achieve,
you have to be heedful. So it actually applies even before. In a sense that if you recognize
that it is your task to develop the right view and then you are heedful in regard to
that task, it is the heedfulness that will make you seek the right view. And then obviously
once you have the right view, that heedfulness will make you develop it further. So that's
why the Buddha singled it out as the soul factor, because he would actually pertain to
somebody from the moment of hearing about the possibility of freedom from suffering to
the moment of understanding the freedom from suffering and then fully developing it. If
he is heedful, he would find a way. Will that alone make him find a way? No, of course not.
That's why you can be heedful, but if you don't come across the right instruction, if
you don't attend to it rightly, you won't. You won't get the right view. It seems to
me there is a difference, something of a difference in what would constitute heedfulness, like
you'd be heedful in regard to what for somebody without the right view, as opposed to being
heedful in regard to what should be. So what should a person without a right view be heedful
about? What I was thinking was mainly, well, heedful of the peril of not having the right
view or knowing that you're heedful of the fact that you're not sot upon it, and take
that seriously in that sense. So if a person is heedful about it, they won't slack the
effort. They won't sort of fall into the assumption that they know that which they don't, and
so on, because they would constantly be heedful about the fact that, well, am I free from
the first three fetters? Do I see the Four Noble Truths? Am I my own guide? Do I need
to defend my views? Am I beyond doubt all of that? It's like, no, no, no, no, no. Well,
then I'm not there yet, so I should remain heedful. So in other words, heedful would
pretty much stand for being, at that stage, would stand, actually at any stage, would
stand for being honest and authentic. So a sot upon a sakkadagam yanagami should also
be heedful of the fact that they still have work to do. So it would be the same principle.
And it's a bit like mindfulness. You can't have too much.
Exactly. Exactly. Which I think it's hard sometimes translated as well, kind of synonymously.
But yeah, you can't be too heedful of the fact that you don't have the right view or
of the fact that you're not on the other hand yet and so on. That will keep you practicing
and directed towards the practice. So it seems to me that heedfulness also refers somewhat
not only to specific things you do, but like the extent to which you do them, not only
in the sense of how intensely, let's say, you practice, if you, I don't know, you could
do extremely intense, trying to think about things and contemplate things and be as always,
you didn't do everything right for half a day, but if the rest of the day you're not,
yeah, yeah, sure. That constitutes just acting out of overly determined mind, which sure,
if you know what you're determining, it can be beneficial, but in and of itself, yeah.
It's not where heedfulness is on the level of mindfulness, context, recollecting your
situation, what are you still subjected to, what are the, can the non-reason lust arise,
can the non-reason anger arise, can the non-reason hindrances hinder you, all of that is reflected
through on a kind of heedfulness. Well, let me actually be careful and check these things.
I might be fine now, but do I know for sure I will remain fine in the future if circumstances
change, if things change, and so on. And then keeping that in mind, not slackening
in regard to it, in the sense that, you know, you can't think, oh, I'll just do this for
a certain amount of time and then I'll take a break. It has to be basically done up to
the point, up to the extent necessary. Yeah, you can, you can take a break from the individual
determinations of, I'll do this or I'll do that, if it's too much, if it's too tight,
but there is never a reason to take a break from heedfulness, inasmuch there's never
a reason to take a break from mindfulness. It's exactly the same, the same thing.
Can I take a break now? Yeah. Is there a danger of me taking a break now?
So I can take a relative break in a sense of I mustn't forget that, yeah, there's still
work to be done. So sure, I need to catch my breath. You can't just keep going in the
same pace. But that, that needs to be understood that heedfulness and mindfulness, there is
never a reason or a justification to take a break from. So to that extent, you should
never rest, because if your rest requires you to, to ignore heedfulness and mindfulness,
means it's a rest of essential distracting kind, for sure.
It's like, um, craving always leads to suffering. So there's never a situation where like relaxing
and, unless you're completely free from it, yeah, then relaxing it would mean inducing
it. So relaxing from heedfulness and mindfulness so that, like a general sort of enduring memory
of your situation, of your liabilities, of all of that, that gives rise to identification,
personality view, craving, everything else. That is already there, underlying tendencies,
thinking for things to become suitable for them to appear. So mindfulness, that's what
mindfulness is, the path to that deftlessness, to freedom from all of it. And it's, it's,
it's kind of learning how to be heedful and mindful without needing to do it on account
of your determination and inspiration, because then when those things are gone, your heedfulness
and mindfulness is gone, and then you're back pretty much in the perilous state of sensuality
and liabilities, because they are, if they're fully understood, or at least initially understood
correctly, you would get a hint that they are truly effortless. So you don't need to
rest from something that doesn't require effort.
Then does that mindfulness, that heedfulness become effortless?
By understanding it, understanding the nature of it.
And what factor is the, allows it to be effortless? So you cannot understand it. Mindfulness is
this, heedfulness is that, but there's another factor which, if you see, you are automatically
careful, if you develop it automatically.
Well, like you also, you only want to see God.
Yeah, we'll see the danger. See the danger, yeah. Attending to it rightly.
There are snakes in this forest.
Knowledge of that makes you heedful.
Yeah, so you're always remembering, oh yeah, snakes, oh yeah, if I get bitten by a snake.
Yeah, so that's why, like again, mindfulness established correctly, invested effort in,
in that sense, like you do need to initially make the effort to recollect the context and
protect the context, but yeah, it gives rise to knowledge, to the recognition of certain
universal principles, and exactly the dangers, how to attend to these things without losing
the sight of the danger and so on.
And that is the, you know, like the, the, the famous practice of Anapanasati, it's really
not a meditation practice, it's a practice of mindfulness, which of course, is a meditation
itself, but not the way people usually think.
So the whole, the whole idea of, of these types of cultivation, the Satipatanas, the
Anapanasati, is just to permeate all the aspects of your experience with the same recollectiveness
and same heedfulness.
So in regards to body, feeling, states of mind, and thoughts.
So in other words, when I'm trying to say, even when people sometimes have this determination
to practice meditation, they don't realize that Anapanasati does not lead you to the
absorptions and experience of pleasantly blissive Jan or whatever you perceive it to be.
It actually leads you to being incapable of becoming unmindful and unheedful, so to speak.
So yes, if you have a determination to practice meditation, practice the same heedfulness
and mindfulness, sure, want a kind of knowledge of your breath, knowledge of your own sense
of self-breeding like this, breathing like that, doesn't matter, knowledge of how you
feel while you breathe, or while you are kind of walking, extending your limbs, eating,
dwelling in solitude, basically, all of these things are there as your situation, as the
basis, the form, the feeling, all of that, and all you need to do is learn how to see
them, discern them, be mindful and heedful in regard to them without needing to do them,
and without forgetting about them either, so that's the tuning of the strings.
So in regard to that, there is this, let's say, subtle but kind of important distinction
that you need to learn how to see them and discern them, then you need to be heedful
in regard to them.
So there is a point where you need to kind of balance or stop trying to see and discern
them.
And that balance would be the beginning of correct heedfulness and mindfulness.
That balance would be the beginning of correct Samadhi, where you're not overly concentrating
and trying to do it, do it, but at the same time, you're incapable of forgetting it.
So it's effortless.
And that point where you say, okay, this is where I just need to be heedful, like, okay,
these are the snakes in this forest, like you said.
Now that is dangerous, I recognize that, so now let me just keep being heedful in regard
to that, but the mind tends to keep wanting, no, no, no, I need to keep, you know, how
can I be sure that this is enough, basically, how can I, so...
Mind tends to overdo it.
Yeah.
Wanting to keep doing it, overtighten it, overdo it.
Or dismiss the whole thing, I'll run away from this forest, but that's impossible either.
So you realize, well, you can try to run away, which always resulted in you returning back
in the forest and getting bitten by snakes, because you didn't discern them sufficiently
enough where the dangers are, or exactly becoming overly invested in discerning even stuff that
you don't really need to discern in that sense.
So knowing where to stop, knowing to recognize where that kind of middle ground is, that
then if you dwell on, invest in, protect, it can grow, but not if you over-tighten,
or if it's too loose either.
Because is it a snake example, you know, walking people who would know they're snakes and then
be hitting the ground constantly with a stick as you're walking through the forest and you
just, but, and then when something happens, like there's danger, there's danger somewhere,
you know, there's insects, there's snakes, there's this, there's this disease everywhere.
And then when something, was that the bat, was that the rabies, was that the disease
of that I'm waiting for?
So you just completely, as if you were already bitten, you don't, you've gone too far, too
tight in your, you're careful, but you've lost it, you've lost the context, you've lost
the plot completely, and then if something does really bite you, you're done.
So yeah, you need to have that balance and see, okay, there is no, there's nothing here,
you have a context, there's nothing biting you, so you can, then you can walk through
the forest barefoot.
To be able to basically kind of draw a line for yourself as to how far you will allow
to act out.
Okay, so there are pile of leaves here, you know, huntiners might be hiding in it, so
let me sweep it, but that doesn't mean now, for the rest of my time in the forest, I will
walk with a broom everywhere.
No, if it looks too, I avoid it, if it doesn't, it's all right.
But if you start giving in, to know I'll sweep this and I'll sweep it, means you started
acting out of fear and concern, and then you are losing perspective, which means now you
are even more exposed.
So basically, the more you act out towards defending what you obviously implicitly took
as valuable and yours, well, the wider the basis of the danger that you're applicable
to becomes.
That's that, that, that monk that was in the arhant in the suttas, well, people didn't
know he was an arhant, going around the forest saying, oh, what a pleasure, what a joy, what
a bliss.
And they thought, oh, he must be remembering his former wives or something.
So they went and told the Buddha, they would have called him, says, what do you refer to
when you talk about his pleasure and the bliss?
Is it previous sensuality?
It's like, no, no, no, no, no, quite the opposite.
He was a prince having five causes of sensual bliss, but constantly fearing for his life,
whether his wives were killing or his relatives or his parents, because he was basically in
line for the throne or whatever.
So he was, he had all the guards and all the palaces, but he could never have a moment
to peace, because he was just, the more he was defending himself and all the possible
permutations of the danger and the attacks, the more vulnerable he was becoming internally.
He was being attacked by, that's already a form of fear, you're already being attacked.
And then when he abandoned the entire ownership, identity, craving, became an arhant, he said,
now I live in this forest with his factual dangers, tiger's, elephant's, snakes, yet
I have no slightest concern for my life.
And whenever he remembers how he used to live his home, I go, what a pleasure, this is now.
Like immeasurable safety amidst the danger.
And it starts by not acting out, it starts by not really going out of your way to defend
and address all the possible, suffering will land on you.
So use common sense, as those other suitors say, like, okay, well, there's a clearly raging
elephant or a group of bandits or something, okay, avoid it until you're an arhant, then
you'll know what to do or what not to do.
But that doesn't mean you're not justified to be like, well, maybe this, maybe this,
or this, but theater here, this is, yeah, it might be.
So like the highest safety is not needing any protection.
But until you reach that point, it is that heedfulness that is kind of your refuge, if
you discern it correctly, like seeing how far the, seeing the danger in, well, in things
that are impermanent and things that are suffering in the nature of things that you would usually
like to depend on, then the only thing that you can depend on is your heedfulness, basically.
Well, the thing that you, that you can't ultimately depend on that will lead you to
not needing to depend on anything.
You're becoming negligent, that's it.
And the more that you dwell on, see that's, yeah, the one with the right view, if you
dwell on the nature of impermanence, nature of suffering, that naturally the mind turns
towards seeing danger in acting negligently in regard to that, or becoming, or heedless
in regard to that, forgetting that.
So it's like you don't need to do anything more, or extra, or, yeah, just within that,
you need to start finding subtler ways that you're still not heedful enough.
Yeah, exactly.
Because obviously, if heedfulness is seen thoroughly, developed thoroughly, you'll be
an unhunt.
The fact that you're not means, okay, so I'm heedful overall.
But within this heedfulness, there are obviously things that still resort to heedlessly.
Yes.
There are not of, you know, core central kind and so on, but are still obstacles.
That's why it's hard to do is, the thing is not to, like, to have one particular moment
of insight or something, but to develop this completely, to thoroughly do it.
It's not only...
Yeah, to keep at it, basically.
It doesn't matter.
Until it's done.
Until it's done, just, yeah.
And one way of staying heedful could be to see where do I seek gratification and see
the danger in those places.
Yeah, yeah, definitely, definitely.
Because that's why a mind would still be seeking gratification in those places, because you
haven't actually stopped and thought about, wait a minute, but that is dangerous.
That pertains to the same principle that I'm trying to abandon.
That is not for my good.
That's for my harm.
That's for the harm of others.
So I should better avoid it.
And consider this, it will be easier to recognize it, and then restrain it.
