So this is from the Angutra Nika and it's called Flies.
The Blessed One says, Bikku's this morning I dressed, took my bowl and robe and entered
Varanasi for alms, while walking for alms near the cattle-yoking fig tree, I saw a dissatisfied
Bikku seeking gratification outwardly, muddle-minded, confused, without clear comprehension, uncomposed
with a wandering mind and loose sense faculties.
Having seen him, I said to that Bikku, Bikku do not pollute yourself, it is inevitable
that flies will pursue an attack one who has polluted himself and been tainted by a stench.
Then being exhorted to thus, that Bikku acquired a sense of urgency.
When this was said, a certain Bikku asked the Blessed One, what Bante is meant by pollution,
what is the stench and what are the flies?
He says, longing is what is meant by pollution, polluting yourself.
Ill will is the stench, bad unwholesome thoughts of flies, it is inevitable that flies will
pursue an attack one who has polluted himself and been tainted by a stench.
So you can have these unwholesome thoughts, these repetitive, evil thoughts of lust, of
ill will.
Why is that?
Why are these flies there?
So how do you deal with the flies?
You try to kill every fly individually, preventing the thoughts dealing with them, antidoting
them, managing them, removing them, or remove the reason why they are coming back.
Ill will, longing, lust, distraction, remove that, these thoughts will stop coming.
We keep saying that.
So that's how you abandon them.
You have flies abandon you by removing that which flies want.
The stench.
And you maintain the stench, you maintain the pollution by acting out, by not being restrained,
by not enduring things on the right level.
That's exactly how you maintain craving, and longing, and aversion towards pain, and wanting,
pleasure, all the reasons that these flies keep coming back.
So God just sends those, protect the context, don't act out, endure things on the right
level, and flies will stop coming.
And they can't come back?
If you lose your behavior, if you start acting, if you start basically accruing again the
stench, accumulating the stench, and the flies will come back, it's not something that can
be done accidentally.
Sure, it can be done carelessly, but because you kept choosing to act out, and go back
to desires, and lose your sensory strength, and abandon the context, and give into distraction,
and so on.
So then the flies will come back.
But if you're of the view that the flies are the problem, and you must be dealing with
the flies through concentrating, and this, and that, and method to stop thinking, and
all these practices, and whatever people would misunderstand from the suttas, then you're
still not emptying the rubbish, because of which the flies are coming, you're just chasing
the flies more vehemently.
You're putting up these barriers, external barriers, and nets, and borders, and machines,
and trash, and repellents, but fundamentally.
While the very problem is the thing that's putting up the borders, and the tractors.
Yeah, that's where the bad smell is.
So assuming you can spend a whole life of management, successful, to a degree, skilled,
with protected circumstances, and so on, fundamentally, you're still in the same domain.
So if you have thoughts of ill will, or thoughts of lust, and oh, I must get rid of this, this
is the problem.
No, that's the symptom of the problem.
Those thoughts are there because your mind has the sediment times, and in the suttas
as well, frequently ponders and dwells on things that are attracting lust, lustful
thoughts, and angry thoughts, and thoughts of ill will, and thoughts of distraction.
So don't frequently ponder on those themes.
What themes?
Well, themes of pleasure is valuable, themes of a version of pain is justified, themes
of these things belong to me, and I feel entitled to act out, and be free from suffering, and
get this, and get my jaan, and get whatever else, I don't want to deal with this.
The themes of I, the themes of mine, all these themes that are contradictory to the universal
natural experience.
Those wrong views of the dirt, yeah, they're perpetuating your attitudes of dirt, the attitudes
of longing, the attitudes of aversion, wanting pleasure, aversion to pain, and as it comes
out of those fundamental cravings.
You can't start the cleansing if you have that wrong view that it is the world that
is making me.
It's the flies that make me think, yeah, yeah, no, that's not where the stench is, that's
the symptom of the stench.
If there are flies, it means there is something, and again, colloquially, flies keep coming
back, I better check this room, I better check this building, something they keep coming
back for.
But if you can't even admit that, then you don't have that mundane right view.
And you wouldn't admit that because it's just too much aversion towards flies.
Lastful thoughts, I must get rid of it, and I must get rid of it, I must get rid of it,
that's where the problem is.
And then the idea of what meditation is, it sort of follows out of that, okay, let me
just concentrate when I'm not aware of these things anymore, when I stop hearing the flies.
That's how I'm free from it, you know, that's just how you learn how to concentrate and
look away from them.
So, you know, seeing where the stench is coming from, accepting that the flies are there because
of the stench.
Yeah, so not wasting, not perpetuating your views of trying to deal with the flies, but
actually focus of, okay, presence of flies means simultaneous presence of the that which
flies are attracted to.
So lastful thoughts cannot come, cannot exist, cannot assail me, I cannot be liable to them
unless there is a simultaneously present state of lastful mind.
Where is that lastful mind?
It's not on the level of the flies and thoughts, it's on the level of signs and features, as
we said before.
So how do I discern that?
What do I look for?
What do I need to do in that sense?
But yeah, if all you do is feel justified about dealing with the flies, through all sorts
of, you know, management techniques and concentrations and so on, then yeah, there's none of this
can apply to them.
But that seeing where the problem is, that's close to the right view, you know, that mundane,
so it's...
Yeah, sure.
You know, it's almost...
Well, it's kind of necessary for the right view, because if you don't even see where
the problem is, you won't be able to learn how to endure things rightly.
For you, endurance would just be, okay, I just have to put up with these flies and do nothing.
No?
You still got to do something, but it mustn't be aimed at the flies.
But all I see is flies and doing something towards flies.
Well, exactly, so you need to learn how else to do something without doing what you take
for granted to be done, deal with the flies, deal with the things that bother me.
The middle way.
Yeah.
But if you're not, if you're going to be trying to deal with things all the time, manage things
which are not the actual problem, as even if you're doing the Buddhist so-called, according
your techniques and your management of the Buddhists...
Sure, verbatim, whatever, do what the Sutta says, you're not doing it on the right level.
And then in a very dangerous situation as well, because now you're establishing that
for yourself as the way out of suffering, when in fact...
Yeah.
It's not.
And then you feel even more justified in managing and dealing with the flies and preventing
flies from coming, not by removing the bait, but by setting up further traps and controlling
the environment and avoiding things that disturb you, like you saw.
So how does one get the right view?
By not dealing with the flies.
Taking this by reflecting on what...
Where the problem is.
Where the problem is.
Although, you know, everything, all my senses are pointing me, it's because of this, this
is why I'm lost for it, this is why I'm angry, that's not what the Buddha said.
The root of suffering is craving, not the world, not things in the world, not sense
objects, not senses, not your thoughts, it's the craving in regard to what is felt.
So that's always on me.
And that's exactly why the right view starts with understanding what suffering is.
Presence of craving means presence of suffering, not presence of flies or presence of this
or that.
So what is that craving that I need to understand?
If you discern it, understand it, see its signs and features, that is the right view.
You saw the cause of suffering, truly, correctly, accurately.
Then you will know exactly what the escape from it is.
You wouldn't need to figure it out as a next step or something.
Seeing the presence of craving means, okay, so absence of craving means absence of suffering
regardless of the flies and the circumstances.
So what, how can I have that craving always absent?
And that's the noble aid for path.
You might not see it in eight terms, as the Buddha described it, but you would see exactly
what that path is in the broad strokes, sensory strength, guarding of the sense doors, not
acting out and doing things on the right level until this gratuitous aversion towards discomfort
is abandoned, which is craving, gratuitous aversion towards discomfort that you take
for granted is your craving.
Pleasure is delight towards comfort is your craving.
That's how there's no, a thing, a craving that you can witness with your senses.
It's always the background context that's maintained through careless attitude of pleasure.
I'm leaning towards just, just by default, no reason.
And the reason is you haven't considered well, thoroughly, frequently, often enough that
leaning towards pleasure is actually dangerous.
That's the danger.
Not presence or absence of pleasure in the world and everything in my cup.
No, it's leaning is the trap, accepting that attitude is how you get trapped, leaning away
from pain, just gratuitously, no, not wanting it.
It's like, why?
Oh, because you never really considered it thoroughly on that level.
That leaning towards, that's the longing.
Leaning away, that's the aversion.
That's the stench.
Yeah, that's the stench.
And then the suffering, the flies, flies, the flies.
That's all the consequences of it.
So if there is no leaning, there would be no flies.
If there is no leaning towards pleasure, there would be no lust or thoughts.
If there is no leaning away from pain, i.e. aversion, craving, there would be no angry
thoughts, no thoughts available, no thoughts of discomfort or discontent.
That's all the thoughts and hindrances and everything else are the symptoms of the problem,
problem of your craving.
So this is the verse at the end of that sutta, it says, the flies, thoughts based on lust
will run in pursuit of one unrestrained, in the sense faculties, unguarded.
A biker who is polluted, tainted by a stench, is far from nibbana and reaps only distress.
Whether in the village or the forest, the unwise, foolish person, not having gained
peace for himself, goes around followed by flies.
But those accomplished in virtuous behaviour, whose delight in wisdom and peace, whose delight
in wisdom and peace, those peaceful ones live happily having destroyed the flies, having
destroyed the flies, starved them away, they'll die away.
