And so my first question was actually, you spoke about it in the last video by, as it happens,
was related to what you mean by delighting in sensuality.
But you did speak about it in the last video and it was quite clear when you said that it's kind of in that attitude of anticipation,
an initial attitude of anticipation or background attitude of anticipation towards a particular experience or something.
And then I think the question that I wanted to just to make sure that just to clarify it is,
what would be the difference between delighting in a sensual thought of sensual nature and engaging mentally in a sensuality?
Is there a difference between those two things?
Well, yes, but they're not on the same level. If you were not delighting, you wouldn't be able to engage mentally.
So delight is the basis for mental engagement. So you can then not engage mentally, but still delight.
But if you don't delight, even thinking about the sensuality of sensuality, there's no delight.
Okay, that's good, that's kind of what I thought. The delight is more like the necessary condition for you to be able to engage in a thought of sensual nature in a sense that's...
To welcome it, to enlighten it, except for the joy that promises and so on, basically to take it for granted.
And so even if you're just sitting and not even moving or doing anything, there is a difference between having an attitude of wanting to go towards something, welcoming it and delighting it.
And then you can then even actively, then there is this active thinking about something of whatever pleasant experience that you want to have or something that you can actively be thinking about it.
But before that, there has to be already, or prior, let's say, underlying it, there is that attitude.
Which remains there. It gives you the meaning, gives the context of what your mind is revolving around.
And that's why, that's why a lot of people would more often than often meditate with sensuality. I mean, suit us the same.
And the point is exactly that, so you might be saying no to the central objects, so you're not engaging with them.
You're refusing to think about them, you're concentrating away from them, you're getting rid of those thoughts.
But is your mind still expecting pleasure, delight in joyful ideas of whatever meditation experience and so on, and say, yes, so that's, that is your intention, that is your context, that is your motivation.
So when you sit to meditate, to sit to meditate in a way of discerning the enduring body there, the basis for the subject to do all these reflections,
or you sit to meditate to constantly devote to get, to produce the experience of pleasing kind. And then that's just exactly the same central principle.
Okay, yeah.
That's in that sense, like even people would take on the seal and the virtue, but in that kind of a conditional way.
They would take it because yes, they were told they need to take it in order to get this special experience of meditation and enlightenment.
But if you're actually, if your meditation is on the level of reviewing your situation, the body, the context, the danger, the pattern, the disenchantment, that is better to give it up, then you realize, oh no,
a seal of virtue is what protects me from falling deeper into this. It's not conditional anymore.
It's indirectly for what it is, abstaining from certain axes, what created this context of recognizing the trap, the bait, and everything else.
That brings me to another, yeah, that's exactly the other thing I wanted to ask about or check.
Is that this, it seems that the danger in relation to sensuality or sin, but again, I have another come back to that in a minute.
Or even the whole domain of the senses and engagement into the senses involved with the senses, because there's, let's say, two broadly speaking aspects of danger that kind of appear more or less clearly to me at different times.
One of which is really in relation to the nature of this particular type of, let's say, you kind of, you can learn to recognize a particular type of, let's say, perception, or if you're in seclusion, there's nothing else, it's more like a thought, type of thought.
It's not about, initially, it will be about certain types of objects, but it's more about the nature of the thought that it contains an invitation or a hook, or it requires you to, it wants you to do something to become involved in a particular type of sense of object, or a particular type of activity or experience in some way.
Like, then in relation to that, there is the danger of, like, the mind becoming disturbed, and you having to kind of hand yourself, you becoming involved, hand yourself on this particular object, or, let's put it like that.
That you become dependent on all of this, this experience, getting something, wanting something, what will happen if we don't get it, what will happen on account of this, becoming busy on account of this, and, yeah, so that's the kind of type of, of danger of, the danger of involvement or being required to do a particular thing.
Is there a more, even more immediate type of danger implicit?
That's, there is, it seems like a second aspect of danger, which is really more about the fact that the, about the nature of the body, such as the senses, as such.
But that nature is there, regardless of whether you're engaged with centrality or not, so what's dangerous about it?
In one case, why isn't danger is in another case?
Yes, because the reason why, yeah, because if, if you can kind of, let's say,
you see, you start to recognize that, regardless of...
Well, let's say, where does the pain come from, suffering? What's the origin of suffering?
The craving.
The craving, yeah. And what is the, where does the craving exist?
Is it a physical thing?
No, it's an in your attitude towards things.
So it's a mental thing.
Is the mental craving, which any craving is mental, so is the craving a method of choice?
Can you choose the craving, which is not to crave?
So craving is something the mind does, which means suffering is something that mind causes.
Is the mind something you ask for, something you can control, something you can own, something that obeys you?
No, kind of, you are aligned with it, so to speak.
It obeys you most of the time, if the circumstances are alright.
But if circumstances change, that's when you realize that mind doesn't actually want to listen to you.
You can't stop it. And then you suffer and counter it.
So then, you want to be free from suffering, means you need to be free from craving,
which means you need to teach your mind how to stop doing it.
Or you need to basically understand your mind or semantic mind.
Either way, mind does the craving.
So how do you then stop that?
And that's where the danger is.
The danger of sensuality is the danger of still, the slight doesn't matter.
The little bit of sensuality means there is still a little possibility of that mind craving against you.
Against itself, resisting, but eager against anything that that, and you can't control that.
So you cannot, you can have wishful thinking and hope that the mind won't,
because you know, you're so calm and you've been keeping precepts for so long.
Fundamentally, for as long as there is a trace of sensuality,
the other backside of that same trace, same phenomenon, same values of sensuality
is the value of the wild mind, which means the craving remains there.
And if you want to see whether your mind still has that uncontrollable threat
that would turn against itself and cause you immense suffering,
if circumstances change, if you lose health, life and so on,
you have just practiced sensory strain and solitude and you'll see when the mind doesn't get what he wants,
it's going to start getting wound up.
And then you will recognize that that's the root of the suffering.
It's the craving.
So I can't stop the craving.
I can't will it away.
I can't just choose it.
But what I can do is take the mind so it becomes unable to turn against itself.
And that's where it recognizes true dangerous sensuality.
So giving in to sensual desire, even on the mental level,
valuing it means allowing mind to remain wild to that extent.
And sooner or later, that will bite you back.
So it's not a delayed danger.
It's the other side of the same coin.
And that's that when danger becomes apparent, means this,
as we said, this anticipation, this delight,
literally this thing while it is present,
the background of it is mind eating itself, the possibility of it.
Won't do it there, but the fact is you're allowing it.
And if you go that way, to that extent,
you gave your own mind room to turn against itself.
And then it will.
Sooner or later, it will.
As long as you don't abandon that attitude and that anticipation
and you don't see thoroughly the peril of giving in to that direction.
Once you do, and as the Buddha said,
you drive up from sensuality internally,
then the mind, the animal will be completely tamed.
It will forget how to turn against itself.
And that's where you recognize that, okay, so now,
suffering cannot arise.
Even if the circumstances are completely falling apart around me.
Everything, disintegrating.
What cannot happen is mind turned against itself,
because you tamed it.
But you won't aim it for as long as there is,
as long as you allow it to eat the bait,
or welcome the bait with delight in the bait.
Think about the bait.
And the bait, really, is basically a prospect of pleasure.
Sure.
Yeah.
But the value of pleasure, delight and pleasure,
prospect of pleasure.
So the bait is also, like, it's not prospect of pleasure.
You can show the bait, but it also
simply cannot seem the danger enough.
That's also what the bait is.
That's what it means.
You are not recognizing the bait.
Seeing the danger is how you basically stop by the end of pleasure,
and recognize the bait.
The bait is the bait.
Yeah, the bait is the bait.
So it's not, well, I'm trying to say,
it's not like that you don't need to actively seek out,
and then, oh, I don't actively seek out,
thus I'm free from bait.
No, do you now, by OK, you don't actively seek out,
but do you now see the danger if you were to seek out?
And if you don't see the danger, to that extent,
yeah, you still don't see the bait.
You don't see the bait.
You don't see the danger.
Yeah, exactly.
And when the bait, or when this prospect is seen as the bait,
as something that will hook me, then delight.
Well, no, when the prospect of that anticipation
is seen, this thing is what makes mind bite itself.
Exactly.
That's what I meant.
Yeah.
That's when there's nothing, no pleasure in the world.
Yeah.
Because it's not that it's that like they...
It's nothing to do with the thing you want.
It's nothing.
It's that like...
Giving it to that or maintaining that or not seeing the danger
that it perpetuates, enables the mind,
and it perpetuates that enabling of mind to bite itself.
Yeah.
When things change, when you apparently what you don't want,
separate it from what you want, you know,
the five codes of central pleasure and so on,
and you know that, you know that.
You will not be able to stop it.
You can just hope and ignore it, but factually,
if there is a room for a mind to bite itself,
it will.
Because you're out of it.
And that's the danger.
So, yes, you can involve the future peril,
and this satisfaction, sure, to reign it in,
but fundamentally, accepting this means mind biting itself.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, that's exactly what I meant.
It's so nice to...
Matches.
Yeah, like the danger is in that any kind of...
That's what you just said.
I'm going to repeat it, but that is the danger.
It's nothing to do with what will happen
in the future, what could happen in the future,
or whatever, because, yeah, that's like,
oh, it could not happen, or it could be fine,
or whatever.
But it's just that fact of being hooked,
like having this...
Yeah, having a hook, having a push,
having any kind of craving is in itself
to be not desired, to be not welcomed.
Because it's the way...
It's like the gateway to hell, really.
Yeah.
It's...
Yeah.
Yeah, this great mass of suffering,
as the person described.
Yeah.
That's the great way to...
That's it. That's because of that.
The great mass of suffering,
and the great mass of suffering,
is always on the count of the same.
The same.
The presence of craving.
Yeah, that is...
Everything else is second to it.
And as we describe, presence of craving,
full stop is something that the mind
that has a been-tain will do.
When faced with a agreeable,
disagreeable or neutral,
which means the great mass of suffering
remains something that you are under.
So you are liable to it,
you will be subjected to it.
But, if the danger of centrality
has been understood, I...
Oh, okay.
So, without...
If I don't give in to this,
if I don't welcome this,
because now I see,
if I do, this is the result.
The result is,
mind remaining able
to eat itself,
if it wants to.
In a split second,
not like, you know,
it will not be a long process.
All you need to do is face with something
you don't want to face with,
and all the dread and pain
and everything will be instantaneously there.
Because the mind will just try to
turn away from it.
Who resisted it?
Because again, you let it,
you gave it room to do so.
And that's why it's...
It's hard to see,
because, you know,
room to do so,
doesn't mean the mind is doing it all the time.
So, you then forget that the mind can still do it.
It can still turn against itself.
It can still want to deny its own existence,
out of pain and aversion and hatred
and ill will and so on.
But because it's not doing that all the time,
you sort of forget
that there is room for it to still
turn around and sink its teeth.
Yeah.
So, that's the danger.
Yeah.
And that was something...
That was another point, that's...
That's why...
Like, it's not...
Being like having a kind of a sense of safety or something
is not about just currently not feeling
any sort of pressure of the sensual kind
because you can have that,
even for quite a long time, for example.
Sure.
But as soon as something comes up,
something arises,
if at that moment,
then you will be going in that direction,
not able to see the problem
and not recognizing it for what it is.
Then there is no safety, really, at all.
So, it's...
So, where is the safety then?
Then the safety is when you know where the danger is,
then you know that no matter when it will...
So, you know now that the danger is in mind being able
to turn against itself.
So, what is then the safety?
Well, if you see the danger of that,
then the...
If the mind is able to turn itself against itself,
what makes the mind being able to turn itself against itself?
That's something that you are responsible for,
but you can't choose to not do.
So, if you recognize the danger of doing that,
which makes the mind able to turn against itself,
then you can not do that.
Yeah, and then eventually,
the mind will cease to be able to turn against itself.
Yeah.
And then that's true safety.
You can't suffer.
Craving cannot arise.
Yeah, so you said that now, like recognizing
where the danger is,
is the necessary condition for safety.
And then is there...
But is there, yeah, is there also a sense
that they kind of...
I think it's something slightly different.
Let's say from the perspective of
not having any safety,
there is...
If you're still in the domain of sensuality
and kind of involved in it,
I kind of don't see how it's possible
in a way to see the danger in it.
It kind of requires at least say,
maybe not the complete sense of safety,
but at least a pretty complete seclusion
in order to then have the perspective of...
That's very sensory-spainting,
garden with the sense those
is a prerequisite that's normally optional.
Yeah.
It needs to be your lifestyle,
your more complete feeling.
Yeah, of course.
In itself, you will still not see
where the danger is and so on.
But for sure, if you're not withdrawn,
then you're removing the possibility of seeing it.
And it's like we said before,
like lighting the fire.
We need them out of the water first.
Like, if you try to light the fire
with sticks in the water,
that's just not going to work.
So you take them out, but they're still wet.
So although, yes, they're out of water.
They're still wet, so they still won't light the fire.
But now at least there is a possibility
that they're drying.
If you don't put them back in the water.
And while they're dry,
thoroughly, then you can light the fire.
And that's it. The mind is first physically
be drawn from sensuality,
not giving it to this behavior,
because you recognize on it, no.
Like our faith to the degree,
but at the same time, you do recognize,
I've been going down the direction of the senses,
my whole life.
And look, I want to practice.
I want to be free from suffering,
because this is what it resulted in.
So then you found the Buddhist teaching,
you have a degree of faith, you start applying it.
And you can even intellectually make sense
that actually it's better if I'm out of the water.
Even if I've done a silly seed,
and so on.
Well, at least I have the possibility to do so,
if I stay out of the water.
Yeah.
And like that.
But in and of itself, that's not a goal.
Yeah, exactly.
The goal is to light the fire,
and you don't forget that.
Yeah.
And again, just to clarify slightly further,
that being out of the water,
because this could be maybe understood in different ways,
as far as I can see,
it really has to become quite
complete seclusion, as in
it wouldn't really be,
because yeah, it can be kind of more or less
restrained and keeping the virtue.
But if you are still like busy
doing various things,
and kind of distracting yourself in any way,
really, then you kind of can't really even see
the which type of
is the...
Yeah, well that's like seeing the danger in the slightest fault.
There's not mean seeing the danger in the slightest fault
of the latter,
and the semantics of the rule,
means the danger of the slightest fault
of, okay, so yes, I'm not giving this...
I'm not giving it to desire by body,
but to this course extent,
that I'm still looking forward to
anything things that are allowable, as we said before.
Also, I'm gonna stop eating, you must stop eating with that desire.
You can't stop eating.
That's the point.
But if a person never recognized that that's where the true danger
and the fault is,
and still remain on the level of, you know,
or I studied all the dictionary,
and I got the definition of the rule,
and this is what objectively means,
and our fault in regard to that interpretation
is what I didn't even fault.
I just need to fix the circumstances
and make everybody else obey it.
That's not seeing the fault.
That's not allowing, basically,
vinegar and sensitive strength
to make your practice on the level of the mind.
That is just using it to protect yourself
through that magical belief that that's where the purity is.
So, in order to abandon
so about the Paramasya,
and it's not in the letter,
it's not in the definition,
it's in like, why am I doing this?
So, you'll find something that's not against the rules,
but that still doesn't absolve you from needing to know
and feel the weight of why you're doing it.
Yes, coffee is allowable to have in the afternoon,
and I can have sugar.
But why?
Why am I doing this?
Where is this rooted?
Oh, yeah, it's been, you know,
very often touched, you know, with a bowing,
triple bowing on a tray.
So, it's just a pure suffering,
I can imagine, in that external form sense.
But, yeah, but that's,
that's irrelevant.
The fault is not in how it was done and presented.
The fault is why am I doing this?
Do I need it? Why, why is this rooted?
And then same would come to exactly like,
oh, yeah, so, you know,
we are allowed to work and do these things,
and like, but it will work.
Yeah, what I was like seeing is, you know,
in the city where it is, where it is,
where it is.
Well, it's the same stuff, you know,
one of the studies.
One, these duties that you perceive
are kind of self-evident and objectively valid.
That's not where the validity is determined.
It's determined by your intentions
and the reasons why you do it.
So, yes, obvious things are of greed,
version delusion, eight presets basically
are not to be broken.
But now all the other in permutation
doesn't mean you can dismiss them.
Quite the opposite.
Means you need to take more of them just on the right level.
Less specifically,
but more because you're taking responsibility
for where the actual fault is.
The mind of desire,
mind of aversion, and mind of distraction.
But if we judge what needs to be done
on the base of authority of the texts,
which is again a contradiction in terms,
like, you will always have your interpretation of it.
There is no such thing as objective meaning of the text.
It's what it means to you and to us.
And vast majority of people
might agree upon the meaning,
but every single one of them
is individually subjective and responsible
for that meaning.
So, the weight of the tradition,
the authority, and so on,
that's not where these things are.
But if you never abandon that,
out of fear of doubt and so on,
well, you never allow your mind
to recognize where the true fault is
and thus have brewed it,
out of fear of doubt.
So, that's when you're like,
you need to get out of the water
for the sake of drying the sticks,
not for the sake of drying out the water
and then just, you know,
defining what the water was and how you dry
and, you know, what you must, what you can,
what you cannot do.
From the point of view of desire,
you can't do anything.
You're not out of water.
If the light in the fire is your goal.
If not, you know,
if just living in a spiritual community
that agrees upon certain terms and interpretations,
is your goal then fine.
But that's not what we're talking about.
So, just to come back to this,
the degree of, let's say,
the degree of seclusion.
And it's, I think, in the studies that
sometimes even says like,
he goes into physical seclusion
and mental seclusion.
Physical or physical withdrawal
and mentally secluded.
Or mentally withdrawn.
Can you be mentally withdrawn if you're not physically withdrawn?
No, you cannot.
So, there's the physical sense of withdrawal
but even there, it needs more
than, like, physically
being secluded as in a secluded environment
or just being restrained.
There is necessity for mental
to be mentally withdrawn
from even mentally engaging
in unwholesome things
for which you need to be able to already see
how you are mentally engaging with unwholesome things.
In order to then be able to see the danger
in doing so, in order to then
kind of have any kind of sense of safety.
So, in other words,
you need to basically
want to light the fire.
And in order to do so,
you need to abandon
things, external things,
avoidance of responsibilities,
external authorities, external agreements,
as the measure of your safety,
purity, practice
and defining what you need to do.
You need to abandon your perceived sense of duty.
So, you need to abandon
so about Parmas basically.
That's used. You know, these fetters
and all these random things, they serve purpose.
You're fettered willingly
by them because they protect you
from that which is very displeasing.
The weight of responsibility,
the weight of interpretation,
the weight of choices and so on.
So, you have a choice to make.
You can remain sheltered,
covering things up.
And if you want to uncover it,
then you have to unshelter it.
That's to me like,
the true safety comes from mind being unable
to turn against itself.
But in order to arrive there,
you need to stop covering up the fact
that the mind can't turn against itself.
Oh, but I'm fine.
You know, I keep the precepts and the pure
and the devotional and stuff.
That is all just conditional.
Sure, that's nice in a worldly sense.
But then you need to start asking yourself,
why am I doing this?
If I took, oh no, I agree with this,
with this tradition of interpretation
or whatever else the way we should do.
Fine, but you still need to know why
and take responsibility for it.
It's never on them. It's never on others.
It's never on the, as I said,
on the external world.
Even if you say, yeah, I'll agree
to what you already agreed.
That still doesn't absorb me from needing to know
why I'm doing that and think for myself
and take responsibility for it.
But often that's exactly why it's done.
I will go with majority,
with the tradition, with the established voice
so I don't have to think for myself.
But you are thinking for yourself,
now you're just lying to yourself about it.
Because how would you choose to go
with the tradition with established voice
unless you thought about it?
And gave into it. And now you're just saying,
no, no, I just go, but I do what others say.
So you do need to take responsibility for it
and then it ceases to be on that level.
And then you realize it's all,
it is all interpretation.
It precepts that interpretation.
Like, yeah, you know,
you can bend in this way, bend in that way, sure.
But fundamentally, you realize, okay,
you could extrapolate the principle of
creed, the version delusion, central desire,
ill will,
carelessness, distraction.
That is what needs to be restrained.
How we define it? And can I touch this?
And if it's touch, can I do this?
Well, you know, if I said it,
okay, you can go into these details if it's helpful.
But not for the sake of deriving safety
from the definition that you read in a book
or had seen your mind told you.
But simply from knowing more
how to recognize the root of the problem
in your mind.
So the degree delusion doesn't hide from you
or did you don't feel absorbed from it?
So when I recognize that there is nothing
I, nothing at all,
I have to do.
For nothing at all that I can do
that can absorb me from taking the
responsibility for whatever I choose to do.
Yeah, also,
so the more, on a more immediate level,
it will be, if you abandon still about
parmasters, it will be like,
oh, I don't need to do anything
in order to be safe.
And that's some safe.
So the relief of abandoning the factors,
it's factual.
It's not intellectual.
And it's on the exact same level.
See, it is a burden.
Having to define, having to follow,
having to update, having to comply,
having to do, having to perform.
All of that is a factual burden.
You don't see the burden in aspect
because you emphasize the sheltering aspect.
Once you stop sheltering,
in that aspect, you can actually eventually,
if you go into the right direction,
abandon the burden,
if I don't engage that way,
I remain safe.
I remain unexposed.
So in a way, it's on the count of
the loss of respect.
I don't understand.
Like you said, that you
pay more attention in a way to the
sheltering aspect, but not to
how it affects you.
I wouldn't say it's on a kind of loss of
respect because you never had the respect.
You start by not having the respect.
So it's on a kind of
the lack of respect.
Loss would imply you sort of had it
and then you lost it.
But, you know, you start already
fatted.
Yeah.
That's
why
it's like in a way that
like, said about a parama so, for example,
kind of covers up.
That's what it does.
It's what its purpose is really
is to make something appear
comfortable or feel comfortable.
That isn't comfortable.
And it shouldn't be comfortable.
And as in this...
What do you mean?
Because
the avoiding responsibility
for things through having things
duties and others
depending on other things
that you...
It kind of
makes this...
Yeah, makes it comfortable.
I see what you mean.
It makes it doable,
but actually nothing is changed
on a fundamental level.
You're not closer to light in the fire.
And so, you shouldn't be comfortable.
You should recognize that
there is still
plenty of room
for mind to turn against itself
in many different ways.
But yeah, you will feel
absolved from needing to deal with it
because, you know,
abide under the
collective responsibility
of majority that we all contributed
and all but take. And I'm safe.
Safe to the group.
Safe to the tribe.
Yeah.
It's kind of gone off
in a different...
It's a very different direction.
I wanted to come back to the...
If it's okay,
we're kind of going in different directions.
I wanted to come back to the hindrances.
Um...
Because...
Another question I had,
I was...
Because I often...
I realized, basically, that often I would...
Sometimes it's not that clear to me,
even what
exactly is meant
by, uh,
thought or a...
Like a...
Yeah.
Because sometimes...
I often...
I'm kind of...
I think of it in terms of
not necessarily defined by particular...
Yeah, particular objects
or having...
Even something necessarily being agreeable in a way.
What I realized that
sometimes things that I was thinking of as, like,
yeah, sensuality
and...
Because it really pertains to, like,
engaging in some kind of experience
or feeling like the need to do something, really.
Um...
But it's not really...
It would kind of come down to, like,
oh, that's more like doubt, or that's more, like,
kind of, one other one of the hindrances.
They do share the same kind of the same, yeah.
That's the thread of hindrances.
That's the bond together.
So, it can be on the level of specific
touch, on, like, the overall, uh,
agreeability of the, of, you know,
the experience.
But, uh, it does always imply that
that sense of pleasure,
which is considered safe, friendly,
agreeable to me.
That's when that's what the Brumel Vitox
was, perfect syllabus.
It starts by, yeah, not having sexual intercourse.
Uh, whether you're talking to monks
or not having sexual intercourse with women,
they're not touching them,
they're not going to be touched,
they're not, uh, talking to them,
they're not listening to them talk,
they're not looking at them,
they're not thinking about them,
they're not wishing about having a divorce.
Hmm.
So, it was the extension of the same principle.
So, okay, I might have abandoned
any kind of physical corner,
all these pleasures that would be binding me here.
Oh, but I still hope that this,
I will find somewhere else here.
So, new here, where it will be
and safe for me, where pleasures will be accessible.
Hmm.
So, in other words, uh,
are you still valuing
a situation external
to your state of mind here and now?
Hmm.
That will provide the ability and pleasure.
There is a thread of centrality, yeah.
And that's when, like, if, same,
like with its meditation or any other,
if you're expecting this thing to come on the level of just this external experience
that just happened internally now
and everything else,
you know, it's a very simple principle, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
And what kind of...
So, you might, you know, sorry,
like, you know, you can't,
you cannot necessarily tell your mind
to immediately stop thinking about those things.
But you can certainly not lose perspective or learn
after not lose perspective,
or are kind of having those thoughts present.
Hmm.
Yeah, and the thing that's...
And what would be the perspective, by the way?
Let's say, how would you not lose a perspective
of the spectrum of sexual intercourse
with a, you know,
where we're not attracted to?
Up to the level of wishing heavenly rebirths
and safety of heavens.
What is the...
How would you maintain perspective
at any part of that spectrum?
Any thought, whatever it is,
what would maintain the perspective of the entire thing?
Of the entire domain?
What would maintain the perspective of the...
What would make you not lose perspective?
Whether it's a course,
carnal, central,
or heavenly...
Well, it would be recognizing that danger
of that whole...
It's the same danger.
Yeah, it's the same danger of whether it's...
Yes, heavens, you know, it's better.
Actually, sure.
If you have desire to heavens, then having desire to come
and pleasure here and now, which your far was,
with far worse consequences,
unintended consequences.
But fundamentally, if you want to be free from it all,
you don't want to leave the slightest room for your mind
to turn against itself,
even in hundreds of millions of years of time in the future,
it's the same danger.
And then there will be no room for mind.
And then the craving will truly be abandoned.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
If the danger is seen there,
then it really doesn't matter at all,
whether there is no kind of even...
Asking, oh, but it's a little or it's bigger,
it's smaller or not even...
Whatever way it would never domain,
in whatever shape, whatever it's not about,
it's like...
And the thing is, as well...
And that's what Google described in the suit
as, you know, talk about aggregates and how it's
it's dangerous and I'm similar.
And we said, it doesn't matter.
But it's past, future, present, big, small, personal,
impersonal, foreign, familiar,
nice, light, heavy.
And after the property of it,
the danger is seen the same.
Not mind, not to be welcomed,
not to be delighted in.
And see that long enough,
and the mind will come down.
In other words, the mind will become unable
to turn against itself.
God cannot be done anymore.
And that's like the description of the true freedom,
the true safety.
It cannot be reverted back,
like a stone split into leaves,
sort of dried up.
It cannot now go back.
So it has completely dried.
Fire as bullets, sticks will burn.
God, there are no more sticks to be wet.
But then from the perspective of valuing pleasure,
that's exactly what a safety is seen.
That's exactly what is seen as safe, basically.
What is...
What is dangerous, so to say.
Like the bait.
Sure, sure.
Yeah, yeah.
The prospect of, oh, let me get this.
Yeah, let me have it.
That's my safety.
That's my safety.
I enjoy the comfort of familiarity,
the feeling, so the taste, the bait has.
And as we said last time,
it does not start when I act.
Yeah, exactly.
It starts when I already...
With the lightness, you're already...
You're already not seeing it as dangerous.
That's where it starts.
And that's exactly what the...
Yeah, why?
That's even the danger is in the delights,
in towards it.
That's the gratification, that's the danger of us.
It's all on that, in that same kernel.
It's the same thing on it.
Just different aspects of it.
Yeah.
That's how you keep it away is the same thing in a way.
Yeah.
So yeah, if you were to not act out of the delights long enough
and get to discern the background, not ignored,
you would see that the background over there is the bait.
The delight is the bait.
Exactly.
The bait is the danger, the delight is the danger.
It is the danger.
Exactly.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That's really...
And all the future consequences, it's all because of this.
This is the framework, this is the necessary basis.
This will be there if those consequences are ever too clear.
And yeah, from the perspective of seeing that,
then the slightest prospect of going towards that,
going in that direction, is very unpleasant, actually.
Or it would be very unpleasant.
It's almost like you're out of prison.
And now you see the prison guard is going,
oh, come back in here.
I have some very nice...
I don't know, cake.
But the fear would be on the level of,
oh, this crazy mind might forget and go back.
Yeah, yeah.
Like, you know you wouldn't.
But if the mind is still not saying,
if it still has room to move, you lose, that's the danger.
Yeah.
And there was the similarly of the charcoal pit.
Yeah, man initially goes willingly there and burns and stuff
with the embers because he perceives it pleasant today.
He gets cured, he doesn't even need to.
And if somebody were to pick him up and carry him there,
wouldn't he kick and scream,
wouldn't he be everywhere else except there?
Yeah.
And it's like, yeah.
And you really can't see like,
cause, you know, why would anybody want to,
like, actually go in that direction when,
but you do, that's what I kind of meant.
In a way for that, you do already need the perspective
of safe, like some kind of safety.
You can't have that kind of perspective
from already being in it and seeing that as the safety.
Yeah, do you want to have, like, you know,
seeing that principle will be done on different levels,
like different layers.
You'll be peeling it more and more.
But yeah, it will be the same thing.
But up until to the point, you realize that if I were to die
the next second, will my mind have aversion towards that?
Will it try to sort of, you know, resist it,
fight it, deal with it, avoid it, close its eyes,
look away.
If so, or if I'm not sure,
means there is still room for it to move,
to fight itself.
So that cannot, should not be allowed,
if I want to be truly free, secured from bondage.
